 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 17 printed pages and 3 blank pages. IB16 06_0620_21/4RP© UCLES 2016 [Turn over 

## *6622954837* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

### CHEMISTRY 0620/21 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) May/June 2016 Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet^ 45 Minutes Soft clean eraserSoft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid.Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you.DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

There areanswers A (^) ,forty B, C questions on this paper. Answerand D. all questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet.A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 20. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/21/M/J/16 

1 The rate of diffusion of two gases, methane, CHapparatus shown. 4 , and ethene, C 2 H 4 , is measured using the 

 constant pressure applied gas syringe gas 

 metal foil – gas escapes through small hole in the foil Which gas diffuses faster and why? 

 diffuses fastergas that reason A ethene Ethene molecules are heavier and so move faster. B ethene Ethene molecules have a double bond which makes them more reactive. C methane Methane molecules are lighter and so move faster. D methane Methane molecules are smaller so they can get out of the small hole more easily. 

2 A sample of a dye is investigated by chromatography. A line is drawn across a piece of chromatography paper and a spot of the dye is placed on it. The paper is placed in water. 

 water 

 chromatography paper 

 spot of dye line 

 Which row is correct? what is used to draw the line position of spot A ink above the level of the water B ink below the level of the water C pencil above the level of the water D pencil below the level of the water 


© UCLES 2016 0620/21/M/J/16 [Turn over 

3 The paper chromatogram below was obtained from four different dyes. Which dye has an Rf value of 0.7? 

### A B C D 

 solvent front 

 baseline 

4 Which statements about isotopes of the same element are correct? 1 They are atoms which have the same chemical properties because they have the same number of electrons in their outer shell. 2 They are atoms which have the same number of electrons and neutrons but different numbers of protons. 3 They are atoms which have the same number of electrons and protons but differentnumbers of neutrons. 

 A 1 and 2 B 1 and 3 C 2 only D 3 only 

5 The table shows the electronic structure of four atoms. 

 atom electronic structure W 2,8,1 X 2,8,4 Y 2,8,7 Z 2,8,8 Which two atoms combine to form a covalent compound? A W and X B W and Y C X and Y D X and Z 


© UCLES 2016 0620/21/M/J/16 

6 Which statement describes the attractive forces between molecules (intermolecular forces)? A They are strong covalent bonds which hold molecules together. B They are strong ionic bonds which hold molecules together. C They are weak forces formed between covalently-bonded molecules. D They are weak forces which hold ions together in a lattice. 

7 The diagram represents the general structure of a solid Z. 

# + + + 

# + + + 

# + + + 

- – – –^ – 

- 

- – – 

 What is Z? A aluminium B iodine C silicon dioxide D sulfur 

8 A compound, X, contains 40.0% carbon, 6.7% hydrogen and 53.3% oxygen by mass. The relative molecular mass, Mr, of X is 60. What is the molecular formula of X? A CH 2 O B CH 4 O C C 2 H 4 O D C 2 H 4 O 2 

9 25 cm^3 of 0.1 mol / dm^3 hydrochloric acid exactly neutralise 20 cm^3 of aqueous sodium hydroxide. The equation for this reaction is: NaOH + HCl → NaCl + H 2 O What is the concentration of the sodium hydroxide solution? A 0.080 mol / dm^3 B 0.800 mol / dm^3 C 0.125 mol / dm^3 D 1.25 mol / dm^3 


© UCLES 2016 0620/21/M/J/16 [Turn over 

10 Which reactions could take place at the anode during electrolysis? 1 4OH–(aq) → 2H 2 O(I) + O 2 (g) + 4e– 2 2Cl – (aq) → Cl 2 (g) + 2e– 3 Cu2+(aq) + 2e–^ → Cu(s) 4 2H+(aq) + 2e–^ → H 2 (g) A 1 and 2 B 1 and 4 C 2 and 4 D 3 and 4 

11 The diagram shows some properties that substances may have. To which labelled part of the diagram does 235 U belong? 

 compound an energyused as source 

 radioactive 

### A 

### B C D 

12 The diagram shows a simple cell. voltmeter 

 zinc electrode copper electrode 

 electrolyte 

### V 

 Which statement about the process occurring when the cell is in operation is correct? A Cu2+^ ions are formed in solution. B Electrons travel through the solution. C The reaction Zn → Zn2+^ + 2e–^ occurs. D The zinc electrode increases in mass. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/21/M/J/16 

13 Hydrogen burns exothermically in oxygen. The equation for the reaction is: 2H 2 + O 2 → 2H 2 O The table shows the bond energies involved. bond bond energy in kJ / mol H–H 436 O=O 498 O–H 464 What is the energy given out during the reaction? A –3226 kJ / mol B –884 kJ / mol C –486 kJ / mol D –442 kJ / mol 


© UCLES 2016 0620/21/M/J/16 [Turn over 

14 A liquid X reacts with solid Y to form a gas. Which two diagrams show suitable methods for investigating the rate (speed) of the reaction? 

### X 

### Y 

### X 

 cotton wool cotton wool 

### 1 2 

### 3 4 

### Y 

### X 

### Y 

### X 

### Y 

 stopper 

 balance 

 balance 

 stopper 

 A 1 and 3 B 1 and 4 C 2 and 3 D 2 and 4 

15 Which statements explain why increasing temperature increases the rate of a chemical reaction? 1 Heat makes the molecules move faster and collide more often. 2 Heat makes the molecules collide with more energy so they are more likely to react. 3 Increasing temperature lowers the activation energy for the reaction. A 1 and 2 B 1 and 3 C 1 only D 2 only 


© UCLES 2016 0620/21/M/J/16 

16 Steam reacts with carbon in an endothermic reaction. C(s) + H 2 O(g) CO(g) + H 2 (g) Which conditions of temperature and pressure would give the largest yield of hydrogen? temperature pressure A high high B high low C low high D low low 

17 Which equation represents a reduction reaction? A Fe2+^ + e–^ → Fe3+ B Fe2+^ → Fe3+^ + e– C Fe3+^ + e–^ → Fe2+ D Fe3+^ → Fe2+^ + e– 

18 Which statements are properties of an acid? 1 reacts with ammonium sulfate to form ammonia 2 turns red litmus blue 1 2 A   B   C   D   

19 Which row describes whether an amphoteric oxide reacts with acids and bases? 

 reacts with acids reacts with bases A no no B no yes C yes no D yes yes 


© UCLES 2016 0620/21/M/J/16 [Turn over 

20 Which substance reacts with dilute sulfuric acid to form a salt that can be removed from theresulting mixture by filtration? 

 A aqueous barium chloride B aqueous sodium hydroxide C copper 

## D copper(II) carbonate 

21 Where in the Periodic Table is the metallic character of the elements greatest? 

 left or right side of a period 

 at the top or bottom of a group A left bottom B left top C right bottom D right top 

22 Some properties of four elements, P, Q, R and S, are shown in the table. Two of these elements are in Group I of the Periodic Table and two are in Group VII. 

element reaction with water (^) room temperaturephysical state at P reacts vigorously solid Q does not react with water solid R reacts explosively solid S dissolves giving a coloured solution liquid Which statement is correct? A P is below R in Group I. B Q is above R in Group I. C Q is below S in Group VII. D R is below S in Group VII. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/21/M/J/16 

23 Which of the following could be a transition element? 

 melting point in °C 

 density in g / cm^3 colour^ 

 electrical conductor A 114 4.9 purple no B 659 2.7 grey yes C 1677 4.5 grey yes D 3727 2.3 black yes 

24 Two statements about argon are given. 1 Argon has a full outer shell of electrons. 2 Argon is very reactive and is used in lamps. Which is correct? A Both statements are correct and statement 2 explains statement 1. B Both statements are correct but statement 2 does not explain statement 1. C Statement 1 is correct but statement 2 is incorrect. D Statement 2 is correct but statement 1 is incorrect. 

25 A student investigated the reactions of four metals, R, S, T and U, with solutions of their salts. The results are given in the table. metal metal salt result R R S 

 S nitrate T nitrate U nitrate 

 reacts reacts no reaction T U nitrate reacts U R nitrate no reaction What is the order of reactivity of the metals, most reactive first? A R → S → U → T B R → T → U → S C S → U → T→ R D U → R → T → S 


© UCLES 2016 0620/21/M/J/16 [Turn over 

26 Three students, X, Y and Z, were told that solid P reacts with dilute acids and also conductselectricity. 

 The table shows the students’ suggestions about the identity of P. X Y Z copper iron graphite Which of the students are correct? A X, Y and Z B X only C Y only D Z only 

27 Which statement about the uses of metals is correct? A Aluminium is used in the manufacture of aircraft because of its strength and high density. B Copper is used in electrical wiring because of its strength and high density. C Mild steel is used in the manufacture of car bodies because of its strength and resistance tocorrosion. D Stainless steel is used in the construction of chemical plant because of its strength and resistance to corrosion. 

28 Aluminium is manufactured by electrolysis of aluminium oxide. The diagram shows the electrolysis cell. 

 molten aluminium 

 aluminium oxide in molten cryolite 

 cathode 

 anode 

 + + 

 Which statement about the process is not correct? A Aluminium ions gain electrons during the electrolysis and are reduced. B Cryolite is added to reduce the melting point of the aluminium oxide. C The anode and cathode are made of graphite. D The cathode has to be replaced regularly because it is burnt away. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/21/M/J/16 

29 The diagram shows an experiment to investigate how paint affects the rusting of iron. 

 air 

### P Q 

 water 

 iron painted iron 

 What happens to the water level in tubes P and Q? tube P tube Q A falls rises B no change rises C rises falls D rises no change 

30 A new planet has been discovered and its atmosphere has been analysed. atmosphere 

 planet 

 The table shows the composition of its atmosphere. gas percentage by volume carbon dioxide 4 nitrogen 72 oxygen 24 Which gases are present in the atmosphere of the planet in a higher percentage than they are in the Earth’s atmosphere? A carbon dioxide and oxygen B carbon dioxide only C nitrogen and oxygen D nitrogen only 


© UCLES 2016 0620/21/M/J/16 [Turn over 

31 Many car exhaust systems contain a catalytic converter. Which change does not occur in a catalytic converter? A carbon dioxide → carbon B carbon monoxide → carbon dioxide C nitrogen oxides → nitrogen D unburnt hydrocarbons → carbon dioxide and water 

32 Ammonia is formed by a reversible reaction. N 2 (g) + 3H 2 (g) 2NH 3 (g) The forward reaction is exothermic. Which changes in conditions would increase the yield of ammonia? increase in pressure 

 increase in temperature A   B   C   D   

33 The equation for an exothermic reaction in the Contact process is shown. 2SO 2 (g) + O 2 (g) → 2SO 3 (g) Which effects do increasing the temperature and using a catalyst have on the rate of formation of sulfur trioxide, SO 3? increasing the temperature 

 using a catalyst A rate decreases rate decreases B rate decreases rate increases C rate increases rate decreases D rate increases rate increases 


© UCLES 2016 0620/21/M/J/16 

34 A farmer’s soil is very low in both nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P). Which fertiliser would improve the quality of this soil most effectively? percentage nitrogen (N) phosphorus (P) potassium (K) A 11 11 27 B 12 37 10 C 28 10 10 D 31 29 9 

35 The diagram shows the separation of petroleum into fractions. 

 gasoline 

 X Y Z 

 bitumen 

 petroleum 

 What could X, Y and Z represent? X Y Z A diesel oil lubricating fraction paraffin B lubricating fraction diesel oil paraffin C paraffin lubricating fraction diesel oil D paraffin diesel oil lubricating fraction 


© UCLES 2016 0620/21/M/J/16 [Turn over 

36 Which of the compounds shown are in the same homologous series? 1 CH 3 OH 2 CH 3 CH 2 OH 3 CH 3 COOH 4 CH 3 CH 2 CH 2 OH A 1, 2 and 3 B 1, 2 and 4 C 1, 3 and 4 D 2, 3 and 4 

37 Which compounds contain the same number of carbon, hydrogen and oxygen atoms? 

 W X Y Z ethyl methanoate methyl ethanoate methyl methanoate ethyl ethanoate A W and X B W and Y C X and Z D Y and Z 

38 What is an advantage of producing ethanol by fermentation of sugar compared to the catalyticaddition of steam to ethene? 

 A The alcohol produced is purer. B The process is faster. C The process uses high temperature. D The process uses renewable raw materials. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/21/M/J/16 

39 The structure of a monomer is shown. 

 C 

 C l H C H 

### F 

 Which polymer can be made from this monomer? 

 C l 

 C l 

 C l 

 C l C C C l 

 C l C C l 

 C l C 

### A 

### H 

 C l 

 H 

### F 

### C C 

### H 

 C l C H 

### F 

### C 

### B 

 C l 

 C l 

 F 

### F 

### C C 

 C l 

 C l C F 

### F 

### C 

### C 

 C l 

### F 

 C l 

### F 

### C C 

 C l 

### F 

### C 

 C l 

### F 

### C 

### D 

40 Which formula represents a polyester? 

### D C 

### O 

### C 

### O 

### C C 

### O O 

### N 

### H 

### N 

### H 

### N 

### H 

### N 

### H 

### C 

### O 

### B N 

### H 

### N 

### H 

### C 

### O 

### C 

### O 

### O 

### N 

### H 

### C 

### C C 

### O 

### C 

### O 

### C C 

### O O 

### O O O O 

### A O^ O^ O^ O 


© UCLES 2016 0620/21/M/J/16 

### BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2016 0620/21/M/J/16 

### BLANK PAGE 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeInternational Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge LocalExaminations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2016 0620/21/M/J/16 

### BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2016 0620/21/M/J/16 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements^1 Hhydrogen^1 

(^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Beberyllium 9 atomic number atomic symbol **Key**^ name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mgmagnesium 24 19 Kpotassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Srstrontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Gegermanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 22 Tititanium (^4840) Zrzirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rfrutherfordium– 23 Vvanadium (^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Crchromium (^5242) Momolybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sgseaborgium– (^25) Mnmanganese (^5543) Tctechnetium– (^75) Rerhenium (^186107) Bhbohrium– (^26) Feiron (^5644) Ruruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Iriridium (^192109) Mtmeitnerium– (^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pdpalladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Dsdarmstadtium– (^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rgroentgenium– (^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cdcadmium (^11280) Hgmercury (^201112) Cncopernicium– 114 F _l_ flerovium– 116 Lvlivermorium– (^7) Nnitrogen 1415 Pphosphorus (^3133) Asarsenic (^7551) Sbantimony 12283 Bibismuth 209 (^8) Ooxygen 1616 Ssulfur (^3234) Seselenium (^7952) Tetellurium (^12884) Popolonium– (^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Brbromine 8053 I iodine 12785 Atastatine– (^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Scscandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) Lalanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.) actinium– (^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium^141 (^91) Paprotactinium 231 (^60) Ndneodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pmpromethium– (^93) Npneptunium– (^62) Smsamarium (^15094) Puplutonium– (^63) Eueuropium (^15295) Amamericium– (^64) Gdgadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bkberkelium– (^66) Dydysprosium 16398 Cfcalifornium– (^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Eseinsteinium– (^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Mdmendelevium– (^70) Ybytterbium (^173102) Nonobelium– (^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lrlawrencium– 


