 CHEMISTRY 0620/51 Paper 5 Practical Test May/June 2016 

 CONFIDENTIAL INSTRUCTIONS Great care should be taken to ensure that any confidential information given does not reach the candidates either directly or indirectly. 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

 This document consists of 8 printed pages. 

 [Turn over 

 IB16 06_0620_51CI/3RP © UCLES 2016 

# *9033818783* 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 The teacher responsible for preparing the examination is not allowed to consult the question paper before the examination. Teachers should, as part of the preparation of the examination requirements, carry out any tests indicated on pages 2 and 3 in order to satisfy themselves that the supplied materials are satisfactory. 

 The standard Report Form to be included with the scripts is given on pages 7 and 8. Please detach and enclose it with the scripts. If scripts are despatched in more than one envelope, it is essential that a copy of the Supervisor’s Results and of the Report Form are sent inside each envelope. 

 More material may be issued if required, without penalty, but this should not be necessary. 

 Supervisors are advised to remind candidates that all substances in the examination should be treated with caution. Safety glasses should be provided. 

 In accordance with COSHH (Control of Substances Hazardous to Health) Regulations, operative in the UK, a hazard appraisal of the examination has been carried out. 

 Attention is drawn, in particular, to certain materials used in the examination. The following codes are used where relevant. 

 C = corrosive MH = moderate hazard 

 HH = health hazard T = acutely toxic 

 F = flammable O = oxidising 

 N = hazardous to the aquatic environment 

 Hazard data sheets should be available from your suppliers. 

 If you have any queries regarding these Instructions, please contact CIE by e-mail: info@cie.org.uk, by phone: +44 1223 553554, by fax: +44 1223 553558, stating the Centre number, the nature of the query and the syllabus number quoted above. 

 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/51/CI/M/J/16 

**For Question 1** 

Each candidate will require 

 (a) one 25 cm^3 measuring cylinder 

 (b) one 50 cm^3 burette with stand and clamp 

 (c) one 250 cm^3 conical flask 

 (d) 100 cm 3 of an aqueous solution of sodium carbonate, Na 2 CO3, of concentration 0.05 mol / dm 3 , labelled aqueous sodium carbonate (This can be made by adding 5.3 g of anhydrous sodium carbonate to 500 cm^3 of distilled water. Dissolve the solid and then make the volume up to 1 dm^3 with distilled water.) 

 (e) 100 cm 3 of hydrochloric acid of concentration 0.10 mol / dm^3 , labelled solution A 

 (f) 100 cm 3 of hydrochloric acid of concentration 0.20 mol / dm^3 , labelled solution B 

 (g) access to water and distilled water 

**[F][MH][HH] (h)** thymolphthalein indicator 

**[F][MH][HH] (i)** methyl orange indicator 

 (j) a white tile 

 (k) funnel for filling burette 

 (l) teat pipette 


© UCLES 2016 0620/51/CI/M/J/16 **[Turn over** 

**For Question 2** 

Each candidate will require 

 (a) 0.5 g of sodium bromide, NaBr, labelled solid C 

**(b)** 15 cm 3 of an aqueous solution of chromium(III) chloride, CrC _l_ (^) 3 .6H 2 O, of concentration 0.1 mol / dm 3 , labelled **solution D (c)** distilled water **(d)** apparatus for a flame test _One method is to dip a wooden splint into dilute hydrochloric acid and then into the solid, followed by insertion into a blue flame._ **(e)** rack of six test-tubes and stopper to fit **[N][MH] (f)** aqueous silver nitrate of sufficient concentration to give a positive halide test **[C] (g)** aqueous nitric acid of concentration 1 mol / dm^3 **[C] (h)** aqueous sodium hydroxide of concentration 1 mol / dm^3 **[N][MH] (i)** aqueous ammonia of concentration 1 mol / dm^3 **(j)** spatula **(k)** teat pipettes **(l)** pH indicator paper and chart Note: Labels do not need to include concentrations. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/51/CI/M/J/16 

## THE SUPERVISOR’S REPORT IS ON PAGES 7 AND 8 


© UCLES 2016 0620/51/CI/M/J/16 **[Turn over** 

## THE SUPERVISOR’S REPORT IS ON PAGES 7 AND 8 


© UCLES 2016 0620/51/CI/M/J/16 

## THE SUPERVISOR’S REPORT IS ON PAGES 7 AND 8 


© UCLES 2016 0620/51/CI/M/J/16 

 This form must be completed and returned in the envelope with the scripts. 

 REPORT ON PRACTICAL CHEMISTRY 

**1 (a)** Supervisor’s Results 

 It is recommended that the Supervisor should be a chemistry teacher. 

 The Supervisor is asked to carry out the experiments in Questions 1 and 2 and to record the results on a spare copy of the question paper clearly labelled ‘Supervisor’s Results’. Failure to enclose these results and this report form may lead to candidates being unavoidably penalised. 

 (b) The candidate numbers of candidates in each session were: 

 First session Second session 

 [Turn over 


© UCLES 2016 0620/51/CI/M/J/16 

**2** The Supervisor is invited to report details of any difficulties experienced by candidates giving names and candidate numbers. The report should include reference to: 

 (a) any general difficulties encountered in making preparations for the examination; 

 (b) difficulties due to faulty apparatus or materials; 

 (c) accidents to apparatus or materials. 

 Other cases of individual hardship, e.g. illness, temporary disability, should be reported direct to CIE on the normal Application for Special Consideration form. 

## NAME OF CENTRE ............................................................................................................................... 

## CENTRE NUMBER ................................................... 

## SIGNED ....................................................... 

 Supervisor 

DECLARATION (to be signed by the Principal) 

The preparation of this practical examination has been carried out so as to maintain fully the security of the examination. 

NAME ..................................................................................................................................................... (in block capitals) 

SIGNED .............................................................................................................................. (Principal) 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 


