 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 16 printed pages. IB16 06_0620_22/4RP© UCLES 2016 [Turn over 

# *1301766353* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/22 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) May/June 2016 Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet^ 45 Minutes Soft clean eraserSoft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid.Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you.DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

There areanswers A (^) ,forty B, C questions on this paper. Answerand D. all questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet.A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/22/M/J/16 

1 The particles of a substance gain energy and change from a regular ordered structure to adisordered structure with large distances between the particles. 

 Which change of state is described? A boiling B evaporation C melting D sublimation 

2 In the chromatography experiment shown, which label represents the solvent front? 

## C 

## D 

## B 

## A 

3 X is a mixture of colourless compounds. The diagram shows a chromatogram of X and of three pure compounds, P, Q and R. 

## X P Q R 

 Which statement is not correct? A A locating agent was used to develop the chromatogram of X. B P and R could be present in X. C P and R have different solubilities in the solvent. D Q has a greater Rf value than R. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/22/M/J/16 [Turn over 

4 Which statements about isotopes of the same element are correct? 1 They are atoms which have the same chemical properties because they have the same number of electrons in their outer shell. 2 They are atoms which have the same number of electrons and neutrons but different numbers of protons. 3 They are atoms which have the same number of electrons and protons but differentnumbers of neutrons. 

 A 1 and 2 B 1 and 3 C 2 only D 3 only 

5 The table shows the electronic structure of four atoms. 

 atom electronic structure W 2,8,1 X 2,8,4 Y 2,8,7 Z 2,8,8 Which two atoms combine to form a covalent compound? A W and X B W and Y C X and Y D X and Z 

6 Which statement describes the attractive forces between molecules (intermolecular forces)? A They are strong covalent bonds which hold molecules together. B They are strong ionic bonds which hold molecules together. C They are weak forces formed between covalently-bonded molecules. D They are weak forces which hold ions together in a lattice. 

7 Metals consist of a lattice of positive ions in a ‘sea of electrons’. Why is aluminium malleable? A Its ions are attracted to the ‘sea of electrons’. B Its ions are tightly packed together. C Its ions repel each other. D Its layers of ions can slide over each other. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/22/M/J/16 

8 A sample of 16.0 g of a metal oxide, MO, is reduced to 12.8 g of the metal, M. What is the relative atomic mass, Ar, of M? A 32 B 64 C 80 D 128 

9 The equation for the reaction between calcium carbonate and hydrochloric acid is shown. CaCO 3 (s) + 2HCl (aq) → CaCl 2 (aq) + H 2 O(l) + CO 2 (g) How many moles of calcium carbonate will give 24 cm^3 of carbon dioxide when reacted with an excess of the acid? A 1 mol B 0.1 mol C 0.01 mol D 0.001 mol 

10 The diagram shows the electrolysis of molten zinc chloride, ZnCl 2. 

 electrode X^ electrode Y 

 molten zinc chloride 

## + – 

 Which statement is correct? A Oxidation occurs at electrode X and the equation is: 2Cl –^ → Cl 2 + 2e–. B Oxidation occurs at electrode Y and the equation is: Zn2+^ + 2e–^ → Zn. C Reduction occurs at electrode X and the equation is: Zn2+^ + 2e–^ → Zn. D Reduction occurs at electrode Y and the equation is: 2Cl –^ → Cl 2 + 2e–. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/22/M/J/16 [Turn over 

11 The diagram shows some properties that substances may have. To which labelled part of the diagram does 235 U belong? 

 compound an energyused as source 

 radioactive 

## A 

## B C D 

12 The diagram shows a simple cell. 

 dilute sulfuric acid 

 metal X metal Y 

 flow of electrons 

 wire 

 For which pair of metals would electrons flow from metal X to metal Y? X Y A copper iron B copper zinc C iron zinc D zinc iron 


© UCLES 2016 0620/22/M/J/16 

13 The energy level diagram for the combustion of methane is shown. 

 CH 4 (g) + 2O 2 (g) 

 CO 2 (g) + 2H 2 O(g) 

energy (^) energy change Which row gives the equation and energy change for this reaction? equation energy change in kJ / mol A CH 4 (g) + 2O 2 (g) → CO 2 (g) + 2H 2 O(g) +891 B CH 4 (g) + 2O 2 (g) → CO 2 (g) + 2H 2 O(g) –891 C CH 4 (g) + 2O 2 (g) → CO 2 (g) + 2H 2 O(I) +891 D CH 4 (g) + 2O 2 (g) → CO 2 (g) + 2H 2 O(I) –891 


© UCLES 2016 0620/22/M/J/16 [Turn over 

14 A liquid X reacts with solid Y to form a gas. Which two diagrams show suitable methods for investigating the rate (speed) of the reaction? 

## X 

## Y 

## X 

 cotton wool cotton wool 

## 1 2 

## 3 4 

## Y 

## X 

## Y 

## X 

## Y 

 stopper 

 balance 

 balance 

 stopper 

 A 1 and 3 B 1 and 4 C 2 and 3 D 2 and 4 

15 Which row describes how the energy of collision between particles changes when concentration and temperature are increased? concentration temperature A increases increases B increases no change C no change increases D no change no change 


© UCLES 2016 0620/22/M/J/16 

16 Methanol is made by reacting carbon monoxide with hydrogen. The reaction is exothermic and is a chemical equilibrium. The equation for the reaction is shown. CO(g) + 2H 2 (g) CH 3 OH(g) Which changes in temperature and pressure increase the yield of methanol? temperature pressure A decrease decrease B decrease increase C increase decrease D increase increase 

17 Which equation represents a reduction reaction? A Fe2+^ + e–^ → Fe3+ B Fe2+^ → Fe3+^ + e– C Fe3+^ + e–^ → Fe2+ D Fe3+^ → Fe2+^ + e– 

18 Which statements are properties of an acid? 1 reacts with ammonium sulfate to form ammonia 2 turns red litmus blue 1 2 A   B   C   D   


© UCLES 2016 0620/22/M/J/16 [Turn over 

19 Which row describes whether an amphoteric oxide reacts with acids and bases? 

 reacts with acids reacts with bases A no no B no yes C yes no D yes yes 

20 Silver chloride is insoluble in water and is prepared by precipitation. Which two substances can be used to make silver chloride? A barium chloride and silver nitrate B hydrochloric acid and silver C hydrochloric acid and silver bromide D sodium chloride and silver iodide 

21 Where in the Periodic Table is the metallic character of the elements greatest? 

 side of a period^ left or right at the top or bottomof a group A left bottom B left top C right bottom D right top 

22 Rubidium is a Group I metal. Which statement about rubidium is not correct? A It has a higher melting point than lithium. B It has one electron in its outer shell. C It reacts vigorously with water. D It reacts with chlorine to form rubidium chloride, RbCl. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/22/M/J/16 

23 The table gives information about four elements, P, Q, R and S. 

 melting point in °C 

 electrical conductivity of element when solid density in g^ /^ cm^3 

 colour of iodide of element P 98 good 0.97 white Q –39 good 13.53 red R 1410 poor 2.33 colourless S 1535 good 7.87 green Which elements could be transition elements? A P, Q and S B Q and S only C R and S only D S only 

24 Part of the Periodic Table is shown. Which element is a gas that does not form a compound with potassium? 

 A B C D 

25 Some magnesium compounds undergo thermal decomposition. What are the products of thermal decomposition of magnesium nitrate, Mg(NO 3 ) 2 , and magnesium hydroxide, Mg(OH) 2? Mg(NO 3 ) 2 Mg(OH) 2 A MgO, NO 2 and O 2 MgO and H 2 O B MgO, NO 2 and O 2 MgO and H 2 C Mg(NO 2 ) 2 and O 2 MgO and H 2 O D Mg(NO 2 ) 2 and O 2 MgO and H 2 

26 Which property is not considered a typical metallic property? A good conductor of heat B low melting point C malleable (can be hammered into shape) D strong 


© UCLES 2016 0620/22/M/J/16 [Turn over 

27 Iron from a blast furnace is treated with oxygen and with calcium oxide to make steel. Which substances in the iron are removed? oxygen removes calcium oxideremoves A carbon acidic oxides B carbon basic oxides C iron acidic oxides D iron basic oxides 

28 Why is cryolite used during the extraction of aluminium by electrolysis? A It is a catalyst for the reaction. B It lowers the melting point of the electrolyte. C It protects the anodes. D It separates the aluminium from the electrolyte. 

29 The diagram shows an experiment to investigate how paint affects the rusting of iron. 

 air 

## P Q 

 water 

 iron painted iron 

 What happens to the water level in tubes P and Q? tube P tube Q A falls rises B no change rises C rises falls D rises no change 


© UCLES 2016 0620/22/M/J/16 

30 A new planet has been discovered and its atmosphere has been analysed. atmosphere 

 planet 

 The table shows the composition of its atmosphere. gas percentage by volume carbon dioxide 4 nitrogen 72 oxygen 24 Which gases are present in the atmosphere of the planet in a higher percentage than they are in the Earth’s atmosphere? A carbon dioxide and oxygen B carbon dioxide only C nitrogen and oxygen D nitrogen only 

31 The gases coming from a car’s engine contain oxides of nitrogen. How are these oxides formed? A Nitrogen reacts with carbon dioxide. B Nitrogen reacts with carbon monoxide. C Nitrogen reacts with oxygen. D Nitrogen reacts with petrol. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/22/M/J/16 [Turn over 

32 Ammonia is manufactured by a reversible reaction. N 2 (g) + 3H 2 (g) 2NH 3 (g) The forward reaction is exothermic. What is the effect of increasing the pressure on the percentage yield and rate of formation ofammonia? 

percentage yield (^) formationrate of A decreases decreases B decreases increases C increases decreases D increases increases 33 The Contact process is used for the manufacture of sulfuric acid. Which statement about this process is not correct? A A catalyst of iron is used. B Oxygen from the air is used to react with sulfur dioxide. C Sulfur trioxide dissolves in sulfuric acid to form oleum. D The temperature used is around 450 °C. 34 Lime (calcium oxide) is used to treat waste water from a factory. Which substance is removed by the lime? A ammonia B sodium chloride C sodium hydroxide D sulfuric acid 


© UCLES 2016 0620/22/M/J/16 

35 The diagram shows the separation of petroleum into fractions. 

 gasoline 

 X Y Z 

 bitumen 

 petroleum 

 What could X, Y and Z represent? X Y Z A diesel oil lubricating fraction paraffin B lubricating fraction diesel oil paraffin C paraffin lubricating fraction diesel oil D paraffin diesel oil lubricating fraction 

36 Which compound is not an alkane, CnH2n+2? A CH 3 CH 2 CH 2 CH 3 B (CH 3 ) 2 CHCH 3 C CH 3 CHCHCH 3 D (CH 3 ) 3 CH 

37 An ester is formed when a carboxylic acid reacts with an alcohol. Which ester is formed when propanoic acid and ethanol react? A CH 3 CO 2 CH 2 CH 3 B CH 3 CO 2 CH 2 CH 2 CH 3 C CH 3 CH 2 CO 2 CH 3 D CH 3 CH 2 CO 2 CH 2 CH 3 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeInternational Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge LocalExaminations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2016 0620/22/M/J/16 

38 What is an advantage of producing ethanol by fermentation of sugar compared to the catalyticaddition of steam to ethene? 

 A The alcohol produced is purer. B The process is faster. C The process uses high temperature. D The process uses renewable raw materials. 

39 In which row are the monomer and polymer chain correctly matched? 

 monomer part of the polymer chain A CH 3 CH=CHCH 3 –CH(CH 3 )–CH(CH 3 )–CH(CH 3 )–CH(CH 3 )– B CH 2 =CHCl –CHCl –CHCl –CHCl –CHCl – C CH 3 CH=CH 2 –CH 3 –CH–CH 2 –CH 3 –CH–CH 2 – D CH 2 =CHCH 2 CH 3 –CH 2 –CH 2 –CH 2 –CH(CH 2 CH 3 )– 

40 Which two polymers have the same linkages bonding the monomers together? A nylon and complex carbohydrate B nylon and protein C Terylene and complex carbohydrate D Terylene and protein 


© UCLES 2016 0620/22/M/J/16 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements^1 Hhydrogen^1 

(^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Beberyllium 9 atomic number atomic symbol **Key**^ name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mgmagnesium 24 19 Kpotassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Srstrontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Gegermanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 22 Tititanium (^4840) Zrzirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rfrutherfordium– 23 Vvanadium (^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Crchromium (^5242) Momolybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sgseaborgium– (^25) Mnmanganese (^5543) Tctechnetium– (^75) Rerhenium (^186107) Bhbohrium– (^26) Feiron (^5644) Ruruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Iriridium (^192109) Mtmeitnerium– (^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pdpalladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Dsdarmstadtium– (^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rgroentgenium– (^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cdcadmium (^11280) Hgmercury (^201112) Cncopernicium– 114 F _l_ flerovium– 116 Lvlivermorium– (^7) Nnitrogen 1415 Pphosphorus (^3133) Asarsenic (^7551) Sbantimony 12283 Bibismuth 209 (^8) Ooxygen 1616 Ssulfur (^3234) Seselenium (^7952) Tetellurium (^12884) Popolonium– (^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Brbromine 8053 I iodine 12785 Atastatine– (^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Scscandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) Lalanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.) actinium– (^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium^141 (^91) Paprotactinium 231 (^60) Ndneodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pmpromethium– (^93) Npneptunium– (^62) Smsamarium (^15094) Puplutonium– (^63) Eueuropium (^15295) Amamericium– (^64) Gdgadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bkberkelium– (^66) Dydysprosium 16398 Cfcalifornium– (^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Eseinsteinium– (^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Mdmendelevium– (^70) Ybytterbium (^173102) Nonobelium– (^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lrlawrencium– 


