 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 16 printed pages. IB16 06_0620_13/3RP© UCLES 2016 [Turn over 

# *8830351027* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/13 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) May/June 2016 Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet^ 45 Minutes Soft clean eraserSoft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid.Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you.DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

There areanswers A (^) ,forty B, C questions on this paper. Answerand D. all questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet.A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/13/M/J/16 

1 In which changes do the particles move further apart? W X 

gas (^) Y liquid (^) Z solid A W and X B W and Z C X and Y D Y and Z 2 Chromatography experiments are carried out on four substances, P, Q, R and S. The same solvent is used in each experiment. The resulting chromatograms are shown below. 

## P Q R S 

 baseline 

 Which statement is not correct? A P and Q are pure substances. B P and R are different substances. C R and S are pure substances. D S is a mixture of substances. 

3 One of the instructions for an experiment reads as follows. Quickly add 50 cm^3 of acid. What is the best piece of apparatus to use? A a burette B a conical flask C a measuring cylinder D a pipette 


© UCLES 2016 0620/13/M/J/16 [Turn over 

4 The structures of diamond and graphite are shown. 

 diamond graphite Which statement about diamond and graphite is not correct? A Diamond is used in cutting tools because the strong covalent bonds make it very hard. B Graphite acts a lubricant because of the weak bonds between the layers. C Graphite conducts electricity because the electrons between the layers are free to move. D Graphite has a low melting point because of the weak bonds between the layers. 

5 The table shows the electronic structure of four atoms. 

 atom electronic structure W 2,8,1 X 2,8,4 Y 2,8,7 Z 2,8,8 Which two atoms combine to form a covalent compound? A W and X B W and Y C X and Y D X and Z 

6 The table shows the atomic structure of four atoms. Which atom is not a metal? electrons neutrons protons A 18 22 18 B 19 20 19 C 19 21 19 D 20 20 20 


© UCLES 2016 0620/13/M/J/16 

7 Potassium, K, forms a compound with fluorine, F. Which statements about this compound are correct? 1 The compound is ionic. 2 The formula of the compound is KF. 3 The compound is soluble in water. A 1, 2 and 3 B 1 and 2 only C 1 and 3 only D 2 and 3 only 

8 The equation shows the reaction between magnesium and sulfuric acid. [Ar: H, 1; O, 16; Mg, 24; S, 32] Mg + H 2 SO 4 → MgSO 4 + H 2 In this reaction, which mass of magnesium sulfate is formed when 6 g of magnesium react with excess sulfuric acid? A 8 B 24 C 30 D 60 

9 The diagram shows an electrical cable. 

 metal core 

 plastic coating 

 Which statement about the substances used is correct? A The coating is plastic because it conducts electricity well. B The core is copper because it conducts electricity well. C The core is copper because it is cheap and strong. D The core is iron because it is cheap and strong. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/13/M/J/16 [Turn over 

10 Electricity is passed separately through concentrated hydrochloric acid, concentrated aqueoussodium chloride and dilute sulfuric acid. 

 In which rows are the electrolysis products correctly named? cathode product anode product 1 concentrated hydrochloric acid 

 hydrogen chlorine 2 concentrated aqueous sodium chloride 

 sodium chlorine 3 dilute sulfuric acid hydrogen oxygen A 1, 2 and 3 B 1 and 2 only C 1 and 3 only D 2 and 3 only 

11 The energy level diagram shows the energy of the reactants and products in a chemical reaction. 

 reactants 

 products 

 energy 

 Which row correctly describes the energy change and the type of reaction shown? energy change type of reaction A energy is given out to the surroundings 

 endothermic B energy is given out to the surroundings 

 exothermic C energy is taken in from the surroundings 

 endothermic D energy is taken in from the surroundings 

 exothermic 


© UCLES 2016 0620/13/M/J/16 

12 The diagram shows some properties that substances may have. To which labelled part of the diagram does 235 U belong? 

 compound an energyused as source 

 radioactive 

## A 

## B C D 

13 A liquid X reacts with solid Y to form a gas. Which two diagrams show suitable methods for investigating the rate (speed) of the reaction? 

## X 

## Y 

## X 

 cotton wool cotton wool 

## 1 2 

## 3 4 

## Y 

## X 

## Y 

## X 

## Y 

 stopper 

 balance 

 balance 

 stopper 

 A 1 and 3 B 1 and 4 C 2 and 3 D 2 and 4 


© UCLES 2016 0620/13/M/J/16 [Turn over 

14 Magnesium is reacted with a dilute acid. The hydrogen gas is collected and its volume measured. The results are shown on the graph. 40 30 20 10 

(^00 1 2 3 4) time / minutes volume of hydrogen / cm 3 

## 5 6 7 8 

 Between which times was the reaction fastest? A 0 and 1 minute B 1 and 2 minutes C 2 and 3 minutes D 7 and 8 minutes 

# 15 A violent reaction occurs when a mixture of chromium(III) oxide and aluminium is ignited with a 

 magnesium fuse as shown. 

 crucible 

 magnesium fuse 

 mixture of 

# chromium(III) oxide 

 and aluminium sand The equation for the reaction is shown. Cr 2 O 3 + 2Al → 2Cr + Al 2 O 3 Which substance is oxidised in the reaction? A aluminium B aluminium oxide C chromium 

# D chromium(III) oxide 


© UCLES 2016 0620/13/M/J/16 

# 16 Equations for the effect of water on anhydrous cobalt(II) chloride and anhydrous 

# copper(II) sulfate are shown. 

 CoCl 2 (s) + 6H 2 O(l) → CoCl 2 .6H 2 O(s) CuSO 4 (s) + 5H 2 O(l) → CuSO 4 .5H 2 O(s) Which statement is not correct? A Both reactions can be reversed by changing the conditions. B Both reactions can be used as a test for water. 

# C The colour change observed when hydrated copper(II) sulfate is heated is from blue to white. 

# D The colour change observed when water is added to anhydrous cobalt(II) chloride is from 

 pink to blue. 

17 Which statements are properties of an acid? 1 reacts with ammonium sulfate to form ammonia 2 turns red litmus blue 1 2 A   B   C   D   

18 Part of the Periodic Table is shown. Which element forms an acidic oxide? **A B C D** 


© UCLES 2016 0620/13/M/J/16 [Turn over 

19 Salts can be made by adding different substances to dilute hydrochloric acid. For which substance could any excess not be removed by filtration? 

# A copper(II) oxide 

 B magnesium C sodium hydroxide D zinc hydroxide 

20 A solution containing substance X was tested. The table shows the results. 

 test result flame test lilac colour acidified silver nitrate solution added yellow precipitate What is X? A lithium bromide B lithium iodide C potassium bromide D potassium iodide 

21 Where in the Periodic Table is the metallic character of the elements greatest? 

 left or right side of a period 

 at the top or bottom of a group A left bottom B left top C right bottom D right top 

22 Which statement about the elements in Group I is correct? A Hydrogen is evolved when they react with water. B Ions of Group I elements have a –1 charge. C Sodium is more reactive than potassium. D Solid sodium is a poor electrical conductor. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/13/M/J/16 

23 Osmium is a transition element. Which row gives the expected properties of osmium? melting point density compoundsformed A high high coloured B high high white C high low white D low high coloured 

24 Two statements about noble gases are given. 1 Noble gases are reactive, monatomic gases. 2 Noble gases all have full outer shells of electrons. Which is correct? A Both statements are correct and statement 2 explains statement 1. B Both statements are correct but statement 2 does not explain statement 1. C Statement 1 is correct but statement 2 is incorrect. D Statement 2 is correct but statement 1 is incorrect. 

25 Some properties of substance X are listed. ● It conducts electricity when molten. ● It has a high melting point. ● It burns in oxygen and the product dissolves in water to give a solution with pH 11. What is X? A a covalent compound B a macromolecule C a metal D an ionic compound 


© UCLES 2016 0620/13/M/J/16 [Turn over 

26 The list shows the order of reactivity of some elements. K Na Ca Mg Zn Fe (H) Cu Which statement about the reactivity of these metals is correct? A Copper reacts with steam to form hydrogen gas. B Magnesium is more reactive than calcium. C Potassium reacts with water to form hydrogen gas. D Sodium oxide is reduced by carbon to sodium. 

27 Iron is obtained from its ore in a blast furnace and is used to make steel. Iron obtained from the blast furnace is contaminated with ......1....... In order to remove this substance, ......2...... is passed through the molten iron. ......3...... is also added to remove oxides of phosphorus and silicon which are ......4....... Which words complete the sentences about the conversion of iron to steel? 1 2 3 4 A carbon nitrogen calcium carbonate acidic B carbon oxygen calcium oxide acidic C carbon oxygen calcium oxide basic D sand oxygen calcium oxide basic 

28 Copper is a transition element used to make saucepans. Which property is not correct for copper? A good conductor of heat B insoluble in water C low melting point D malleable (can be hammered into shape) 


© UCLES 2016 0620/13/M/J/16 

29 The diagram shows an experiment to investigate how paint affects the rusting of iron. 

 air 

## P Q 

 water 

 iron painted iron 

 What happens to the water level in tubes P and Q? tube P tube Q A falls rises B no change rises C rises falls D rises no change 

30 A new planet has been discovered and its atmosphere has been analysed. atmosphere 

 planet 

 The table shows the composition of its atmosphere. gas percentage by volume carbon dioxide 4 nitrogen 72 oxygen 24 Which gases are present in the atmosphere of the planet in a higher percentage than they are in the Earth’s atmosphere? A carbon dioxide and oxygen B carbon dioxide only C nitrogen and oxygen D nitrogen only 


© UCLES 2016 0620/13/M/J/16 [Turn over 

31 The following substances can be formed when petrol is burnt in a car engine. Which substance is the main cause of acid rain? A carbon B carbon monoxide C nitrogen dioxide D water 

32 Which statement about methane is not correct? A It is a greenhouse gas. B It is an alkene. C It is formed by decomposition of vegetation. D It is used as a fuel. 

33 The formulae of four compounds, W, X Y and Z, are given. 

 compound formula W FeSO 4 X (NH 4 ) 3 PO 4 Y KNO 3 Z NaCl Which mixture of compounds makes a complete fertiliser? A W and X B W and Z C X and Y D Y and Z 

34 Which process is used to make lime (calcium oxide) from limestone (calcium carbonate)? A chromatography B electrolysis C fractional distillation D thermal decomposition 


© UCLES 2016 0620/13/M/J/16 

35 The diagram shows the separation of petroleum into fractions. 

 gasoline 

 X Y Z 

 bitumen 

 petroleum 

 What could X, Y and Z represent? X Y Z A diesel oil lubricating fraction paraffin B lubricating fraction diesel oil paraffin C paraffin lubricating fraction diesel oil D paraffin diesel oil lubricating fraction 

36 Whichcompounds? compound does not belong to the same homologous series as the other three 

 A CH 3 OH B C 2 H 5 COOH C C 2 H 5 OH D C 7 H 15 OH 

37 Which reaction is used as a test for alkenes? A Alkenes burn in air to give carbon dioxide and water. B Alkenes decolourise aqueous bromine. C Alkenes form polymers when heated in the presence of a catalyst. D Alkenes react with steam to form alcohols. 

38 Which statement about ethanol is correct? A It burns in air to form ethene and water. B It is prepared from ethene by fermentation. C It is prepared from glucose in an addition reaction. D It is the only product when ethene reacts with steam. 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeInternational Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge LocalExaminations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2016 0620/13/M/J/16 

39 Ethene forms an addition polymer as shown. H ...... + C H 

## H 

## C + 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C + ...... ...... ...... 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

 Which terms describe this polymer? A a saturated compound called poly(ethane) B a saturated compound called poly(ethene) C an unsaturated compound called poly(ethane) D an unsaturated compound called poly(ethene) 

40 Liquid W burns completely to give carbon dioxide and water. Liquid W is a compound containing carbon, hydrogen and oxygen. A solution of liquid W in water is pH 7. What is liquid W? A ethanoic acid B ethanol C gasoline D methane 


© UCLES 2016 0620/13/M/J/16 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements^1 Hhydrogen^1 

(^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Beberyllium 9 atomic number atomic symbol **Key**^ name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mgmagnesium 24 19 Kpotassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Srstrontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Gegermanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 22 Tititanium (^4840) Zrzirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rfrutherfordium– 23 Vvanadium (^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Crchromium (^5242) Momolybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sgseaborgium– (^25) Mnmanganese (^5543) Tctechnetium– (^75) Rerhenium (^186107) Bhbohrium– (^26) Feiron (^5644) Ruruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Iriridium (^192109) Mtmeitnerium– (^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pdpalladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Dsdarmstadtium– (^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rgroentgenium– (^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cdcadmium (^11280) Hgmercury (^201112) Cncopernicium– 114 F _l_ flerovium– 116 Lvlivermorium– (^7) Nnitrogen 1415 Pphosphorus (^3133) Asarsenic (^7551) Sbantimony 12283 Bibismuth 209 (^8) Ooxygen 1616 Ssulfur (^3234) Seselenium (^7952) Tetellurium (^12884) Popolonium– (^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Brbromine 8053 I iodine 12785 Atastatine– (^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Scscandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) Lalanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.) actinium– (^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium^141 (^91) Paprotactinium 231 (^60) Ndneodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pmpromethium– (^93) Npneptunium– (^62) Smsamarium (^15094) Puplutonium– (^63) Eueuropium (^15295) Amamericium– (^64) Gdgadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bkberkelium– (^66) Dydysprosium 16398 Cfcalifornium– (^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Eseinsteinium– (^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Mdmendelevium– (^70) Ybytterbium (^173102) Nonobelium– (^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lrlawrencium– 


