 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 17 printed pages and 3 blank pages. IB16 06_0620_23/3RP© UCLES 2016 [Turn over 

# *0872645576* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/23 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) May/June 2016 Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet^ 45 Minutes Soft clean eraserSoft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid.Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you.DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

There areanswers A (^) ,forty B, C questions on this paper. Answerand D. all questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet.A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 20. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/23/M/J/16 

1 The diagram shows an experiment to demonstrate diffusion. 

 cotton wool soaked in hydrochloric acid 

 cotton wool soaked in ammonia solution 

 ammonium chloride Which statement explains why the ring of ammonium chloride appears as shown? A Ammonia solution only produces a gas which moves until it meets the hydrochloric acid. B Both solutions produce a gas, but ammonia moves quicker than hydrogen chloride because it is lighter. C Hydrochloric acid produces hydrogen chloride which stays at one end of the tube until the ammonia reaches it. D The two solutions run along the tube until they meet. 

2 Chromatography experiments are carried out on four substances, P, Q, R and S. The same solvent is used in each experiment. The resulting chromatograms are shown below. 

## P Q R S 

 baseline 

 Which statement is not correct? A P and Q are pure substances. B P and R are different substances. C R and S are pure substances. D S is a mixture of substances. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/23/M/J/16 [Turn over 

3 The diagram shows the apparatus used to separate the different components of a mixture bychromatography. 

 baseline solvent 

 spot 

 solvent front 

 chromatography paper 

 Which statement about this experiment is correct? A A locating agent is used to find the position of the solvent front. B The components to be separated must be soluble in the solvent. C The baseline on which the spot of the mixture is placed is drawn in ink. D The Rf value is calculated by thethedistancedistancetravelledtravelledbybythethesolventcomponentfront 

4 Which statements about isotopes of the same element are correct? 1 They are atoms which have the same chemical properties because they have thesame number of electrons in their outer shell. 2 Theydifferent numbers of protons. are atoms which have the same number of electrons and neutrons but 3 They are atoms which have the same number of electrons and protons but different numbers of neutrons. A 1 and 2 B 1 and 3 C 2 only D 3 only 


© UCLES 2016 0620/23/M/J/16 

5 The table shows the electronic structure of four atoms. 

 atom electronic structure W 2,8,1 X 2,8,4 Y 2,8,7 Z 2,8,8 Which two atoms combine to form a covalent compound? A W and X B W and Y C X and Y D X and Z 

6 Which statement describes the attractive forces between molecules (intermolecular forces)? A They are strong covalent bonds which hold molecules together. B They are strong ionic bonds which hold molecules together. C They are weak forces formed between covalently-bonded molecules. D They are weak forces which hold ions together in a lattice. 

7 Which substance exists as a lattice of positive ions in a ‘sea of electrons’? A liquid potassium chloride B solid graphite C solid magnesium 

# D solid silicon(IV) oxide 

8 Analysis of a compound formed between magnesium and nitrogen showed it contained 14.4 g of magnesium and 5.6 g of nitrogen. What is the empirical formula of the compound? A Mg 2 N 3 B Mg 3 N 2 C Mg 4 N 6 D Mg 6 N 4 

9 An excess of zinc is added to 100 cm^3 of 1.0 mol / dm^3 hydrochloric acid. The equation for the reaction is: Zn + 2HCl → ZnCl 2 + H 2 What is the maximum volume of hydrogen evolved at room temperature and pressure? A 1.2 dm^3 B 2.0 dm^3 C 2.4 dm^3 D 24 dm^3 


© UCLES 2016 0620/23/M/J/16 [Turn over 

10 The diagram shows a method used to copper-plate a pan 

 pan 

# copper(II) sulfate 

 solution 

 copper 

## + – 

 Which equation represents the reaction at the cathode? A Cu2+^ + 2e–^ → Cu B 2H+^ + 2e–^ → H 2 C 4OH–^ → O 2 + 2H 2 O + 4e– D 2O2–^ → O 2 + 4e– 

11 The diagram shows some properties that substances may have. To which labelled part of the diagram does 235 U belong? 

 compound an energyused as source 

 radioactive 

## A 

## B C D 


© UCLES 2016 0620/23/M/J/16 

12 The diagram shows a simple cell. 

 dilute sulfuric acid 

 metal P metal Q 

 wire 

## V 

 Which pair of metals produces the largest voltage? metal P metal Q A iron copper B magnesium copper C magnesium zinc D zinc copper 

13 Hydrazine, N 2 H 4 , decomposes as shown. 

 N 

## H 

## H 

## N N N + 2 H H 

## H 

## H 

 The energy change for this reaction is –95 kJ / mol. The table shows some bond energies involved. bond bond energy in kJ / mol N N 945 N–H 391 H–H 436 What is the bond energy of the N–N bond? A 158 kJ / mol B 315 kJ / mol C 348 kJ / mol D 895 kJ / mol 


© UCLES 2016 0620/23/M/J/16 [Turn over 

14 A liquid X reacts with solid Y to form a gas. Which two diagrams show suitable methods for investigating the rate (speed) of the reaction? 

## X 

## Y 

## X 

 cotton wool cotton wool 

## 1 2 

## 3 4 

## Y 

## X 

## Y 

## X 

## Y 

 stopper 

 balance 

 balance 

 stopper 

 A 1 and 3 B 1 and 4 C 2 and 3 D 2 and 4 

15 Which row explains why increasing temperature increases the rate of reaction? 

 particles collide more often 

 particles collide with more energy A   B   C   D   


© UCLES 2016 0620/23/M/J/16 

16 Methanol is manufactured by reacting carbon monoxide and hydrogen together in the presenceof an aluminium oxide catalyst. 

 The equation for the reaction is shown. CO(g) + 2H 2 (g) CH 3 OH(g) The reaction is a reversible reaction. The forward reaction is exothermic. Which change in conditions increases the yield of methanol? A decreasing the concentration of the carbon monoxide B increasing the pressure C increasing the rate of the reaction D increasing the temperature 

17 Which equation represents a reduction reaction? A Fe2+^ + e–^ → Fe3+ B Fe2+^ → Fe3+^ + e– C Fe3+^ + e–^ → Fe2+ D Fe3+^ → Fe2+^ + e– 

18 Which statements are properties of an acid? 1 reacts with ammonium sulfate to form ammonia 2 turns red litmus blue 1 2 A   B   C   D   


© UCLES 2016 0620/23/M/J/16 [Turn over 

19 Which row describes whether an amphoteric oxide reacts with acids and bases? 

 reacts with acids reacts with bases A no no B no yes C yes no D yes yes 

20 Barium sulfate is an insoluble salt. 

# It can be made by reacting copper(II) sulfate solution with barium nitrate solution. 

 CuSO 4 (aq) + Ba(NO 3 ) 2 (aq) → Cu(NO 3 ) 2 (aq) + BaSO 4 (s) What is the correct order of steps to obtain a pure, dry sample of barium sulfate from the reactionmixture? 

 step 1 step 2 step 3 A filter evaporate the filtrateto dryness leave the solid formedto cool B filter evaporate the filtrate to the point of crystallisation 

 leave the filtrate to cool C filter leave the residue in awarm place to dry wash the residuewith water D filter wash the residue with water 

 leave the residue in a warm place to dry 

21 Where in the Periodic Table is the metallic character of the elements greatest? 

 left or right side of a period 

 at the top or bottom of a group A left bottom B left top C right bottom D right top 


© UCLES 2016 0620/23/M/J/16 

22 Which statement about the elements in Group I is correct? A Hydrogen is evolved when they react with water. B Ions of Group I elements have a –1 charge. C Sodium is more reactive than potassium. D Solid sodium is a poor electrical conductor. 

23 Osmium is a transition element. Which row gives the expected properties of osmium? melting point density compoundsformed A high high coloured B high high white C high low white D low high coloured 

24 Two statements about noble gases are given. 1 Noble gases are reactive, monatomic gases. 2 Noble gases all have full outer shells of electrons. Which is correct? A Both statements are correct and statement 2 explains statement 1. B Both statements are correct but statement 2 does not explain statement 1. C Statement 1 is correct but statement 2 is incorrect. D Statement 2 is correct but statement 1 is incorrect. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/23/M/J/16 [Turn over 

25 Some properties of substance X are listed. ● It conducts electricity when molten. ● It has a high melting point. ● It burns in oxygen and the product dissolves in water to give a solution with pH 11. What is X? A a covalent compound B a macromolecule C a metal D an ionic compound 

26 Four metals P, Q, R and S are added to separate aqueous solutions of their ions. The results are shown. metal P2+^ Q2+^ R2+^ S2+ P     key Q     = reaction occurs R     = reaction does not occur S     What is the order of reactivity of the metals, most reactive first? A Q → P → S → R B Q → S → P → R C R → P → S → Q D R → S → P → Q 

27 Copper is a transition element used to make saucepans. Which property is not correct for copper? A good conductor of heat B insoluble in water C low melting point D malleable (can be hammered into shape) 


© UCLES 2016 0620/23/M/J/16 

28 Aluminium is extracted by electrolysis of a mixture of aluminium oxide and cryolite. Which statement is not correct? A The electrodes are made from graphite. B The formula for aluminium oxide is Al 2 O 3. C The purpose of the cryolite is to lower the melting point of the mixture. D The reaction taking place at the anode is Al 3+^ + 3e–^ → Al. 

29 The diagram shows an experiment to investigate how paint affects the rusting of iron. 

 air 

## P Q 

 water 

 iron painted iron 

 What happens to the water level in tubes P and Q? tube P tube Q A falls rises B no change rises C rises falls D rises no change 


© UCLES 2016 0620/23/M/J/16 [Turn over 

30 A new planet has been discovered and its atmosphere has been analysed. atmosphere 

 planet 

 The table shows the composition of its atmosphere. gas percentage by volume carbon dioxide 4 nitrogen 72 oxygen 24 Which gases are present in the atmosphere of the planet in a higher percentage than they are in the Earth’s atmosphere? A carbon dioxide and oxygen B carbon dioxide only C nitrogen and oxygen D nitrogen only 

31 Catalytic converters are used to remove some gaseous pollutants from car exhaust fumes. Which gas is removed from the fumes by oxidation? A carbon dioxide B carbon monoxide C nitrogen D nitrogen oxide 

32 Ammonia is produced by the Haber process. N 2 (g) + 3H 2 (g) → 2NH 3 (g). Which statement about the Haber process is not correct? A An iron catalyst is used to increase the rate of reaction. B The reaction is carried out at high temperature to increase the rate of reaction. C The reaction is carried out at low pressure to increase the yield of ammonia. D The reaction is reversible. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/23/M/J/16 

33 One step in the manufacture of sulfuric acid is the oxidation of sulfur dioxide to sulfur trioxide. Which conditions are used for this step? temperature / °C 

 pressure / atmospheres catalyst A 450 1.5 iron 

# B 450 1.5 vanadium(V) oxide 

 C 450 200 iron 

# D 450 200 vanadium(V) oxide 

34 Which process is used to make lime (calcium oxide) from limestone (calcium carbonate)? A chromatography B electrolysis C fractional distillation D thermal decomposition 

35 The diagram shows the separation of petroleum into fractions. 

 gasoline 

 X Y Z 

 bitumen 

 petroleum 

 What could X, Y and Z represent? X Y Z A diesel oil lubricating fraction paraffin B lubricating fraction diesel oil paraffin C paraffin lubricating fraction diesel oil D paraffin diesel oil lubricating fraction 


© UCLES 2016 0620/23/M/J/16 [Turn over 

36 Whichcompounds? compound does not belong to the same homologous series as the other three 

 A CH 3 OH B C 2 H 5 COOH C C 2 H 5 OH D C 7 H 15 OH 

37 The structure of an alkene and the structure of an ester are shown. 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C C H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## CC 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## O 

## O 

## P Q 

 What are the names of P and Q? P Q A but-1-ene ethyl propanoate B but-1-ene propyl ethanoate C but-2-ene ethyl propanoate D but-2-ene propyl ethanoate 

38 What is an advantage of producing ethanol by fermentation of sugar compared to the catalytic addition of steam to ethene? A The alcohol produced is purer. B The process is faster. C The process uses high temperature. D The process uses renewable raw materials. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/23/M/J/16 

39 A polymer has the formula shown. 

 n 

## C 

CH (^3) 

## COOH 

## C 

## H 

## H 

 From which monomers can it be formed? 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## COOH 

CH (^3) 

## R 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## COOH 

CH (^3) 

## S 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## COOH 

CH (^3) 

## T 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## COOH 

CH (^3) 

## U 

 A R and S B R and T C S and U D T and U 

40 Which row shows a natural polymer with the same linkages as a synthetic polymer? 

 natural polymer synthetic polymer A complex carbohydrate nylon B complex carbohydrate Terylene C protein nylon D protein Terylene 


© UCLES 2016 0620/23/M/J/16 

## BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2016 0620/23/M/J/16 

## BLANK PAGE 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeInternational Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge LocalExaminations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2016 0620/23/M/J/16 

## BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2016 0620/23/M/J/16 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements^1 Hhydrogen^1 

(^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Beberyllium 9 atomic number atomic symbol **Key**^ name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mgmagnesium 24 19 Kpotassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Srstrontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Gegermanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 22 Tititanium (^4840) Zrzirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rfrutherfordium– 23 Vvanadium (^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Crchromium (^5242) Momolybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sgseaborgium– (^25) Mnmanganese (^5543) Tctechnetium– (^75) Rerhenium (^186107) Bhbohrium– (^26) Feiron (^5644) Ruruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Iriridium (^192109) Mtmeitnerium– (^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pdpalladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Dsdarmstadtium– (^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rgroentgenium– (^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cdcadmium (^11280) Hgmercury (^201112) Cncopernicium– 114 F _l_ flerovium– 116 Lvlivermorium– (^7) Nnitrogen 1415 Pphosphorus (^3133) Asarsenic (^7551) Sbantimony 12283 Bibismuth 209 (^8) Ooxygen 1616 Ssulfur (^3234) Seselenium (^7952) Tetellurium (^12884) Popolonium– (^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Brbromine 8053 I iodine 12785 Atastatine– (^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Scscandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) Lalanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.) actinium– (^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium^141 (^91) Paprotactinium 231 (^60) Ndneodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pmpromethium– (^93) Npneptunium– (^62) Smsamarium (^15094) Puplutonium– (^63) Eueuropium (^15295) Amamericium– (^64) Gdgadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bkberkelium– (^66) Dydysprosium 16398 Cfcalifornium– (^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Eseinsteinium– (^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Mdmendelevium– (^70) Ybytterbium (^173102) Nonobelium– (^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lrlawrencium– 


