 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all questions. Electronic calculators may be used. You may lose marks if you do not show your working or if you do not use appropriate units. Practical notes are provided on pages 11 and 12. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. 

 CHEMISTRY 0620/52 Paper 5 Practical Test May/June 2016 1 hour 15 minutes Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: As listed in the Confidential Instructions 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

 This document consists of 9 printed pages and 3 blank pages. 

 [Turn over 

 IB16 06_0620_52/6RP © UCLES 2016 

# *3068860685* 

 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 For Examiner’s Use 

 Total 


**1** You are going to investigate the rate of reaction between hydrogen peroxide and aqueous potassium iodide. When these chemicals react they form iodine. Sodium thiosulfate solution reacts with iodine and can be used to show how fast the reaction proceeds. 

 Read all the instructions carefully before starting the experiment. 

 Instructions 

 (a) Fill the burette up to the 40.0 cm^3 mark with sodium thiosulfate solution. Use the large measuring cylinder to pour 100 cm^3 of distilled water into the conical flask. Use the small measuring cylinder to add 6 cm^3 of sulfuric acid, 1 cm 3 of starch solution and 4 cm^3 of aqueous potassium iodide to the flask. Add 1.0 cm 3 of sodium thiosulfate solution from the burette to the mixture in the flask and swirl to mix. 

 Several measurements will be taken during this experiment. Once the timer has been started leave it running until the experiment is complete. 

 Use the small measuring cylinder to start the reaction by adding 3 cm 3 of hydrogen peroxide solution to the flask. Immediately start your timer and swirl the mixture. 

 Note the time taken for a blue colour to appear and record the time in the table. 

 Add a further 0.5 cm 3 of sodium thiosulfate solution to the mixture in the conical flask and swirl until the blue colour disappears. 

 Note the time when the blue colour reappears and record the time in the table below. 

 Continue the experiment adding a further 0.5 cm 3 of sodium thiosulfate solution at a time until a total of 4.0 cm 3 of sodium thiosulfate solution has been added, noting the times for the blue colour to appear after each addition and recording the times in the table. 

 Complete the table. 

 total volume of sodium thiosulfate solution added / cm 3 

 time at which blue colour appears / s 

## 1.0 

## 1.5 

## 4.0 

## [4] 


 © UCLES 2016 0620/52/M/J/16 [Turn over 

 (b) Plot the results you have obtained on the grid and draw a best-fit straight-line graph. 

## 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 

 volume of sodium thiosulfate solution / cm^3 

## 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 

time / s 

## [5] 

 (c) (i) From your graph deduce the time for the blue colour to appear if only 0.5 cm^3 of sodium thiosulfate solution had been added to the mixture in the conical flask. Show clearly on the grid how you worked out your answer. 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [3] 

 (ii) Sketch on the grid the graph you would expect if the experiment was repeated at a higher temperature. [1] 


**(d)** Suggest the purpose of the starch solution. 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

**(e) (i)** Suggest **one** advantage of using a pipette to measure the volume of the hydrogen peroxide. 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [1] 

 (ii) Suggest and explain one disadvantage of using a pipette to measure the volume of the hydrogen peroxide. 

 ............................................................................................................................................. 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [2] 

**(f)** Explain **one** disadvantage of using a beaker instead of a conical flask. 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

## .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

 [Total: 18] 


© UCLES 2016 0620/52/M/J/16 **[Turn over** 

**2** You are provided with two solids, **E** and **F** , which are both water soluble. Carry out the following tests on the solids, recording all of your observations at each stage. 

 tests on solid E 

 (a) Use a spatula to place half of solid E into a test-tube. Add about 10 cm^3 of distilled water to the solid and shake the mixture to dissolve. 

 Divide the solution into three equal portions in three test-tubes and carry out the following tests. 

 (i) Add about 1 cm^3 of aqueous sodium hydroxide to the first portion of the solution. Record your observations. 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [1] 

 (ii) Add about 1 cm^3 of aqueous barium nitrate to the second portion of the solution. Now add excess dilute nitric acid to the mixture. Record your observations. 

 ............................................................................................................................................. 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [2] 

 (iii) Pour the third portion of the solution into a boiling tube and add about 1 cm^3 of dilute hydrochloric acid. Warm the mixture gently. Test the gas given off with a piece of filter 

# paper soaked in aqueous potassium manganate(VII) solution. 

 Record your observations. 

 ............................................................................................................................................. 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [2] 

 (b) Carry out a flame test on the rest of solid E. Record your observations. 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

 (c) What conclusions can you draw about solid E? 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [2] 


**tests on solid F** 

Use a spatula to divide solid **F** into two portions in two test-tubes. 

**(d)** Describe the appearance of solid **F**. 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

**(e) (i)** Heat the first portion of solid **F** , gently then strongly. Test the gas given off with damp red litmus paper. Record your observations. 

 ............................................................................................................................................. 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [3] 

 (ii) Let the solid residue cool down for a few minutes. To the residue add a few drops of 

# copper(II) sulfate solution followed by a few drops of aqueous sodium hydroxide and 

 shake the mixture. Record your observations. 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [1] 

**(f)** Tip the second portion of solid **F** into a boiling tube. Add about 3 cm^3 of aqueous sodium hydroxide to the boiling tube and heat the mixture gently. Test the gas given off. Record your observations. 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [2] 

**(g)** Identify **one** of the ions in solid **F**. 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

 [Total: 16] 


© UCLES 2016 0620/52/M/J/16 **[Turn over** 

**3** Potassium sulfate is the salt made when sulfuric acid is neutralised by potassium hydroxide solution. The correct amount of potassium hydroxide solution must be added to neutralise all of the sulfuric acid. Plan an experiment to obtain pure crystals of potassium sulfate from sulfuric acid and potassium hydroxide solution. You are provided with common laboratory apparatus. 

 ........................................................................................................................................................... 

 ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ..................................................................................................................................................... [6] 

 [Total: 6] 


## BLANK PAGE 


## BLANK PAGE 


## BLANK PAGE 


## NOTES FOR USE IN QUALITATIVE ANALYSIS 

**Test for anions** 

 anion test test result 

 carbonate (CO 3 2–^ ) add dilute acid effervescence, carbon dioxide produced 

 chloride (C l –^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify with dilute nitric acid, then add aqueous silver nitrate 

 white ppt. 

 bromide (Br –^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify with dilute nitric acid, then add aqueous silver nitrate 

 cream ppt. 

 iodide (I–^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify with dilute nitric acid, then add aqueous silver nitrate 

 yellow ppt. 

 nitrate (NO 3 –^ ) [in solution] 

 add aqueous sodium hydroxide, then aluminium foil; warm carefully 

 ammonia produced 

 sulfate (SO 4 2–^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify, then add aqueous barium nitrate 

 white ppt. 

 sulfite (SO 3 2–^ ) add dilute hydrochloric acid, warm gently and test for the presence of sulfur dioxide 

 sulfur dioxide produced will turn acidified aqueous potassium 

# manganate(VII) from purple to 

 colourless 

**Test for aqueous cations** 

 cation effect of aqueous sodium hydroxide effect of aqueous ammonia 

 aluminium (A l 3+^ ) white ppt., soluble in excess giving a colourless solution 

 white ppt., insoluble in excess 

 ammonium (NH 4 +^ ) ammonia produced on warming – 

 calcium (Ca 2+^ ) white ppt., insoluble in excess no ppt. or very slight white ppt. 

# chromium(III) (Cr 3+^ ) green ppt., soluble in excess grey-green ppt., insoluble in excess 

 copper (Cu 2+^ ) light blue ppt., insoluble in excess light blue ppt., soluble in excess, giving a dark blue solution 

# iron(II) (Fe2+^ ) green ppt., insoluble in excess green ppt., insoluble in excess 

# iron(III) (Fe3+^ ) red-brown ppt., insoluble in excess red-brown ppt., insoluble in excess 

 zinc (Zn2+^ ) white ppt., soluble in excess, giving a colourless solution 

 white ppt., soluble in excess, giving a colourless solution 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

**Test for gases Flame tests for metal ions** 

 gas test and test results metal ion flame colour 

 ammonia (NH 3 ) turns damp, red litmus paper blue lithium (Li +) red 

 carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) turns limewater milky sodium (Na +) yellow 

chlorine (C _l_ (^) 2 ) bleaches damp litmus paper potassium (K+) lilac 

# hydrogen (H 2 ) ‘pops’ with a lighted splint copper(II) (Cu 2+^ ) blue-green 

 oxygen (O 2 ) relights a glowing splint 

 sulfur dioxide (SO 2 ) turns acidifed aqueous potassium 

# manganate(VII) from purple to 

 colourless 


