 This document consists of 8 printed pages. 

 [Turn over 

 IB16 06_0620_62/4RP © UCLES 2016 

# *2553361951* 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all questions. Electronic calculators may be used. You may lose marks if you do not show your working or if you do not use appropriate units. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. 

 CHEMISTRY 0620/62 Paper 6 Alternative to Practical May/June 2016 1 hour Candidates answer on the Question Paper. No Additional Materials are required. 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/62/M/J/16 

# 1 The diagram shows the apparatus used to reduce copper(II) oxide with hydrogen. 

 hydrogen 

copper(II) oxide (^) excess hydrogen burning in air ice colourless liquid **(a)** Complete the boxes to name the apparatus. [2] **(b)** Use an arrow to indicate where heat is applied. [1] 

# (c) The colour of the copper(II) oxide changes from ............................. to ............................. [2] 

 (d) Suggest a reason why the U-tube is surrounded by ice. 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

 (e) (i) Identify the colourless liquid formed. 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [1] 

 (ii) Give a chemical test for this liquid. 

 test ...................................................................................................................................... 

 result ................................................................................................................................... [2] 

 (iii) How could you show that this liquid is pure? 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [1] 

 [Total: 10] 


© UCLES 2016 0620/62/M/J/16 **[Turn over** 

**2** A student investigated the rate of reaction between hydrogen peroxide and aqueous potassium iodide. When these chemicals react they form iodine. Sodium thiosulfate solution reacts with iodine and can be used to show how fast the reaction proceeds. 

 (a) A burette was filled up to the 0.0 cm^3 mark with sodium thiosulfate solution. Using a large measuring cylinder, 100 cm 3 of distilled water were poured into a conical flask. Using a small measuring cylinder, 6 cm 3 of sulfuric acid, 1 cm 3 of starch solution and 4 cm^3 of aqueous potassium iodide were added to the flask. 0.5 cm^3 of sodium thiosulfate solution was added from the burette to the mixture in the flask and swirled to mix. The reaction was then started by adding 3 cm^3 of hydrogen peroxide solution to the mixture, and the timer started. The time taken for a blue colour to appear was noted. A further 0.5 cm 3 of sodium thiosulfate solution was added to the mixture in the conical flask, swirled and the blue colour disappeared. The time when the blue colour reappeared was noted. The experiment continued by adding further 0.5 cm 3 portions of sodium thiosulfate solution until a total of 3.0 cm^3 of sodium thiosulfate solution had been added, noting the times at which the blue colour reappeared. 

 Use the timer diagrams on page 4 to record the times in seconds in the table. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/62/M/J/16 

## 0.5 

 total volume of sodium thiosulfate solution added / cm 3 

 timer diagram 

 time at which blue colour appeared / s 

## 1.0 

## 1.5 

## 2.0 

## 2.5 

## 3.0 

 seconds 

 minutes 

 0 0 

 10 30 

 45 15 5 15 

 0 0 

 10 30 

 45 15 5 15 

 0 0 

 10 30 

 45 15 5 15 

 0 0 

 10 30 

 45 15 5 15 

 0 0 

 10 30 

 45 15 5 15 

 0 0 

 10 30 

 45 15 5 15 

## [3] 


 © UCLES 2016 0620/62/M/J/16 [Turn over 

 (b) Plot the results you have obtained on the grid and draw a best-fit straight-line graph. 

## 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 

 volume of sodium thiosulfate solution / cm^3 

## 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 

time / s 

## [5] 

 (c) (i) From your graph deduce the time at which the blue colour would appear if a total of 4.0 cm^3 of sodium thiosulfate solution were added to the mixture in the conical flask. Show clearly on the grid how you worked out your answer. 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [3] 

 (ii) Sketch on the grid the graph you would expect if the experiment was repeated at a higher temperature. [1] 


© UCLES 2016 0620/62/M/J/16 

 (d) Suggest the purpose of the starch solution. 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

 (e) (i) Suggest one advantage of using a pipette to measure the volume of the hydrogen peroxide. 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [1] 

 (ii) Suggest and explain one disadvantage of using a pipette to measure the volume of the hydrogen peroxide. 

 ............................................................................................................................................. 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [2] 

 (f) Explain one disadvantage of using a beaker instead of a conical flask. 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

## .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

 [Total: 17] 


© UCLES 2016 0620/62/M/J/16 **[Turn over** 

**3** Two solids, **E** and **F** , were analysed. Solid **E** was sodium sulfite. Both solids were found to be water soluble. The tests on the solids, and some of the observations, are shown below. 

 tests on solid E 

 (a) Describe the appearance of the solid. 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

 (b) Distilled water was added to solid E in a test-tube and shaken to dissolve. 

 The solution was divided into two portions in two test-tubes and the following tests carried out. 

 (i) Aqueous sodium hydroxide was added to the first portion of the solution. 

 observations ................................................................................................................. [1] 

 (ii) Dilute hydrochloric acid was added to the second portion of the solution. The mixture was warmed. The gas given off was tested with a piece of filter paper soaked in aqueous 

# acidified potassium manganate(VII) solution. 

 observations ....................................................................................................................... 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [2] 

 (c) A flame test was carried out on solid E. 

 observations ........................................................................................................................ [1] 

 tests on solid F 

 tests observations 

 The solid was heated. The gas given off was tested with damp, red litmus paper. 

 pungent gas evolved 

 red litmus paper turned blue 

 Aqueous sodium hydroxide was added to solid F and the mixture heated. The gas given off was tested. 

 pungent gas evolved 

 Universal Indicator paper showed pH 10 

 (d) Identify the gas given off in the tests on solid F. 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

 (e) Identify one of the ions in solid F. 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

 [Total: 7] 


© UCLES 2016 0620/62/M/J/16 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

**4** Potassium sulfate is the salt produced when sulfuric acid is neutralised by potassium hydroxide solution. The correct amount of potassium hydroxide solution must be added to neutralise all of the sulfuric acid. Plan an experiment to obtain pure crystals of potassium sulfate from sulfuric acid and potassium hydroxide solution. You are provided with common laboratory apparatus. 

 ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ..................................................................................................................................................... [6] 

 [Total: 6] 


