 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. IB17 06_0620_22/2RP© UCLES 2017 [Turn over 

# *6632393932* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/22 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) May/June 2017 Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet^ 45 minutes Soft clean eraserSoft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil.Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unlessthis has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

There areanswers **A** (^) , **forty B** , **C** questions on this paper. Answerand **D**. **all** questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the **one** you consider correct and record your choice in **soft pencil** on the separate Answer Sheet. **Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully.** Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer.Any rough working should be done in this booklet. A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16.Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2017 0620/22/M/J/17 

**1** Small crystals of purple KMnOcentres of separate petri dishes filled with agar jelly. They were left to stand under the same 4 ( _M_ r = 158) and orange K 2 Cr 2 O 7 ( _M_ r = 294) were placed at the physical conditions. After some time, the colour of each substance had spread out as shown. dish 1 

KMnO (^4) dish 2 K 2 Cr 2 O 7 The lengths of the arrows indicate the relative distances travelled by particles of each substance. Which statement is correct? **A** Diffusion is faster in dish 1 because the mass of the particles is greater. **B** Diffusion is faster in dish 2 because the mass of the particles is greater. **C** Diffusion is slower in dish 1 because the mass of the particles is smaller. **D** Diffusion is slower in dish 2 because the mass of the particles is greater. **2** Impurities change the melting and boiling points of substances. Sodium chloride is added to a sample of pure water. How does the addition of sodium chloride affect the melting point and boiling point of the water? melting point boiling point **A** increases increases **B** increases decreases **C** decreases increases **D** decreases decreases 


© UCLES 2017 0620/22/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**3** The diagram shows a chromatogram of four substances. Which substance has an _R_ f value of approximately 0.32? 

## A B C D 

 solvent front 

 baseline 

 4 cm 

 6 cm 

 12 cm 

 14 cm 

 19 cm 

 0 cm 

**4** Which element does **not** form a stable ion with the same electronic structure as argon? **A** aluminium **B** chlorine **C** phosphorus **D** potassium 

**5** Graphite and diamond are both forms of the element carbon. Which row shows the number of other carbon atoms that each carbon atom is covalently bonded to in graphite and diamond? graphite diamond **A** 3 3 **B** 3 4 **C** 4 3 **D** 4 4 


© UCLES 2017 0620/22/M/J/17 

**6** Which statement describes metallic bonding? **A** The attraction between a lattice of negative ions and delocalised protons. **B** The attraction between a lattice of positive ions and delocalised electrons. **C** The attraction between delocalised protons and electrons. **D** The attraction between oppositely charged ions. 

**7** Which equations are balanced? 1 Fe 2 O 3 + 3CO → 2Fe + 3CO 2 

2 ZnCO 3 + 2HC _l_ → ZnC _l_ (^) 2 + CO 2 + 2H 2 O 3 Mg(NO 3 ) 2 + NaOH → Mg(OH) 2 + 2NaNO 3 4 CaCO 3 + H 2 SO 4 → CaSO 4 + H 2 O + CO 2 **A** 1 and 2 **B** 1 and 4 **C** 2 and 3 **D** 3 and 4 **8** Calcium carbide, CaC 2 , reacts with water to form ethyne, C 2 H 2 , and calcium hydroxide. The equation for the reaction is shown. CaC 2 (s) + 2H 2 O(l) → C 2 H 2 (g) + Ca(OH) 2 (s) Which volume of ethyne is produced when 6 g of water react completely with calcium carbide? **A** 4 dm^3 **B** 8 dm^3 **C** 36 dm^3 **D** 72 dm^3 **9** Which statement about electrolysis is correct? **A** Electrons move through the electrolyte from the cathode to the anode. **B** Electrons move towards the cathode in the external circuit. **C** Negative ions move towards the anode in the external circuit. **D** Positive ions move through the electrolyte towards the anode during electrolysis. 


© UCLES 2017 0620/22/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**10** The reactivity series for a number of different metals is shown. 

 most reactive least reactive magnesium zinc iron copper silver platinum The diagram shows different metal strips dipped into an electrolyte. V 

 metal strip metal strip 

 electrolyte Which pair of metals produces the highest voltage? A copper and magnesium B magnesium and platinum C magnesium and zinc D silver and platinum 

**11** Which statement about fuels is correct? **A** Heat energy can only be produced by burning fuels. **B** Hydrogen is used as a fuel although it is difficult to store. **C** Methane is a good fuel because it produces only water when burned. **D** Uranium is burned in air to produce energy. 

**12** Which statements about exothermic and endothermic reactions are correct? 1 During an exothermic reaction, heat is given out. 2 The temperature of an endothermic reaction goes up because heat is taken in. 3 Burning methane in the air is an exothermic reaction. **A** 1, 2 and 3 **B** 1 and 2 only **C** 1 and 3 only **D** 2 and 3 only 


© UCLES 2017 0620/22/M/J/17 

**13** The equation for the reaction between hydrogen and chlorine is shown. 

H 2 (g) + C _l_ (^) 2 (g) → 2HC _l_ (g) The reaction is exothermic. The bond energies are shown in the table. bond bond energyin kJ / mol C _l_ –C _l_ +240 H–C _l_ +430 H–H +436 What is the energy change for the reaction? **A** –1536 kJ / mol **B** –184 kJ / mol **C** +184 kJ / mol **D** +246 kJ / mol **14** A gas is produced when calcium carbonate is heated. Which type of change is this? **A** chemical **B** exothermic **C** physical **D** separation 


© UCLES 2017 0620/22/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**15** A student was investigating the reaction between marble chips and dilute hydrochloric acid. 

 bung 

 marble 

chips (^25) cm^3 of dilute hydrochloric acid gas syringe Which changes slow down the rate of reaction? temperatureof acid concentrationof acid of marble chipssurface area **A** decrease decrease decrease **B** decrease decrease increase **C** increase decrease decrease **D** increase increase increase **16** The reaction used to manufacture ammonia from nitrogen and hydrogen is reversible. An equilibrium can be established between ammonia, nitrogen and hydrogen. Which statement describes the equilibrium? **A** Both the forward reaction and the backward reaction have the same rate. **B** The rate of the backward reaction is greater than the rate of the forward reaction. **C** The rate of the forward reaction is greater than the rate of the backward reaction. **D** The forward and backward reactions have both stopped. **17** An example of a redox reaction is shown. Zn + Cu 2+^ → Zn 2+^ + Cu Which statement about the reaction is correct? **A** Zn is the oxidising agent and it oxidises Cu 2+. **B** Zn is the oxidising agent and it reduces Cu 2+. **C** Zn is the reducing agent and it oxidises Cu 2+. **D** Zn is the reducing agent and it reduces Cu 2+. 


© UCLES 2017 0620/22/M/J/17 

**18** Which type of oxide is aluminium oxide? **A** acidic **B** amphoteric **C** basic **D** neutral 

**19** Which statements about a weak acid, such as ethanoic acid, are correct? 1 It reacts with a carbonate. 2 It does not neutralise aqueous sodium hydroxide solution. 3 It turns red litmus blue. 4 It is only partially ionised in aqueous solution. **A** 1 and 2 **B** 1 and 4 **C** 2 and 3 **D** 3 and 4 

**20** Silver chloride is a white solid which is insoluble in water. Which statement describes how a sample of pure silver chloride can be made? **A** Add aqueous silver nitrate to aqueous sodium chloride and then filter. **B** Add aqueous silver nitrate to dilute hydrochloric acid, evaporate and then crystallise. **C** Add silver carbonate to dilute hydrochloric acid, evaporate and then crystallise. **D** Add silver to dilute hydrochloric acid, filter and then wash the residue. 

**21** Dilute sulfuric acid is added to two separate aqueous solutions, X and Y. The observations are shown. solution X white precipitate solution Y bubbles of a colourless gas Which row shows the ions present in the solutions? solution X solution Y **A** Ba 2+^ CO 3 2– **B** Ca 2+^ C _l_ – **C** Cu 2+^ CO 3 2– **D** Fe 2+^ NO 3 – 


© UCLES 2017 0620/22/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**22** Which element is less reactive than the other members of its group in the Periodic Table? **A** astatine **B** caesium **C** fluorine **D** rubidium 

**23** The elements oxygen and sulfur are in the same group of the Periodic Table. Which statement about oxygen and sulfur is **not** correct? **A** They are non-metals. **B** They have giant covalent structures. **C** They have six electrons in their outer shells. **D** They react together to form an acidic oxide. 

**24** Why are weather balloons sometimes filled with helium rather than hydrogen? **A** Helium is found in air. **B** Helium is less dense than hydrogen. **C** Helium is more dense than hydrogen. **D** Helium is unreactive. 

**25** Which process is involved in the extraction of zinc from zinc blende? **A** Cryolite is added to lower the melting point of zinc blende. **B** Molten zinc blende is electrolysed. **C** Zinc blende is heated with carbon. **D** Zinc blende is roasted in air. 


© UCLES 2017 0620/22/M/J/17 

**26** Element E: 

- forms an alloy 

- has a basic oxide 

- is below hydrogen in the reactivity series. What is E? **A** carbon **B** copper **C** sulfur **D** zinc 

**27** A list of metals is shown. aluminium copper iron magnesium silver zinc Which metal will displace all of the other metals from aqueous solutions of their salts? **A** aluminium **B** iron **C** magnesium **D** zinc 

**28** Stainless steel is an alloy of iron and other metals. It is strong and does not rust but it costs much more than normal steel. What is **not** made from stainless steel? **A** cutlery **B** pipes in a chemical factory **C** railway lines **D** saucepans 


© UCLES 2017 0620/22/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**29** The diagram shows some uses of water in the home. 

## 1 2 3 

 For which uses is it important for the water to have been treated? A 1 only B 2 only C 3 only D 1, 2 and 3 

**30** The carbon cycle includes the processes combustion, photosynthesis and respiration. Which row shows how each process changes the amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere? combustion photosynthesis respiration **A** decreases decreases increases **B** decreases increases decreases **C** increases decreases increases **D** increases increases decreases 

**31** Which statement about the conditions used in the Haber process is **not** correct? **A** A high temperature is used because the forward reaction is exothermic. **B** A high pressure is used because there are fewer moles of gas in the products than in thereactants. **C** An iron catalyst is used to increase the rate of the forward reaction. **D** The unreacted hydrogen and nitrogen are recycled to increase the amount of ammoniaproduced. 

**32** Which chemical reaction decreases pollution in the air? **A** S + O 2 → SO 2 **B** N 2 + O 2 → 2NO **C** 2CH 4 + 3O 2 → 2CO + 4H 2 O **D** 2NO + 2CO → 2CO 2 + N 2 


© UCLES 2017 0620/22/M/J/17 

**33** Which statement about sulfuric acid is correct? **A** It is made by the Haber process. **B** It is made in the atmosphere by the action of lightning. **C** It reacts with ammonia to produce a fertiliser. **D** It reacts with copper metal to produce hydrogen gas. 

**34** Statements about methods of manufacture and uses of calcium oxide are shown. 1 It is manufactured by reacting acids with calcium carbonate. 2 It is manufactured by heating calcium carbonate. 3 It is used to desulfurise flue gases. 4 It is used to treat alkaline soil. Which statements are correct? **A** 1 and 2 **B** 1 and 4 **C** 2 and 3 **D** 3 and 4 

**35** The industrial fractional distillation of petroleum is shown. 

 kerosene fraction 

 naphtha fraction 

 gasoline fraction 

 refinery gas 

 diesel oil fuel oil fraction petroleum lubricating fraction and bitumen 

## Y 

 Which process happens at Y? A burning B condensation C cracking D evaporation 


© UCLES 2017 0620/22/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**36** Which statement about homologous series is **not** correct? 

**A** Alkenes have the same general formula, C (^) nH2n+2. **B** Each member of the homologous series of alkanes differs from the next by CH 2. **C** The members of a homologous series all have similar chemical properties. **D** The members of a homologous series all have the same functional group. **37** The diagram shows part of the molecule of a polymer. 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

 Which diagram shows the monomer from which this polymer could be manufactured? A B C D 

 H H H 

## H 

## C H C 

## H 

## H 

## C H 

## H 

## H 

## H C 

## H 

## H 

## C O 

## H 

## H 

## C C H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

**38** Ethanol is manufactured by fermentation or by the catalytic addition of steam to ethene. What is an advantage of ethanol manufacture by fermentation instead of by the catalytic addition of steam to ethene? **A** Ethanol manufactured by fermentation is purified by distillation. **B** Ethanol manufacture by fermentation produces purer ethanol. **C** Ethanol manufacture by fermentation uses large areas of land. **D** Ethanol manufacture by fermentation uses renewable resources. 

**39** The formula of an ester is CH 3 CH 2 CH 2 COOCH 2 CH 2 CH 3. Which acid and alcohol react together to make the ester? acid alcohol **A** butanoic acid butanol **B** butanoic acid propanol **C** propanoic acid butanol **D** propanoic acid propanol 


© UCLES 2017 0620/22/M/J/17 

**40** Polyesters and polyamides are types of synthetic polymer. Which statements are correct? 1 They are made by addition polymerisation. 2 They are made by condensation polymerisation. 3 The monomers from which they are made are unsaturated hydrocarbons. 4 The monomers from which they are made contain reactive functional groups at their ends. **A** 1 and 3 **B** 1 and 4 **C** 2 and 3 **D** 2 and 4 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeInternational Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge LocalExaminations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2017 0620/22/M/J/17 

## BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2017 0620/22/M/J/17 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements^1 Hhydrogen^1 

(^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Beberyllium 9 **Key** atomic numberatomic symbol name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mgmagnesium 24 19 Kpotassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Srstrontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Gegermanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 (^22) Tititanium (^4840) Zrzirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rfrutherfordium– 23 Vvanadium (^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Crchromium (^5242) Momolybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sgseaborgium– (^25) Mnmanganese (^5543) Tctechnetium– (^75) Rerhenium (^186107) Bhbohrium– (^26) Feiron (^5644) Ruruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Iriridium (^192109) Mtmeitnerium– (^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pdpalladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Dsdarmstadtium– (^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rgroentgenium– (^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cdcadmium (^11280) Hgmercury (^201112) Cncopernicium– 114 F _l_ flerovium– (^116) Lvlivermorium– (^7) Nnitrogen 1415 Pphosphorus (^3133) Asarsenic (^7551) Sbantimony 12283 Bibismuth 209 (^8) Ooxygen 1616 Ssulfur (^3234) Seselenium (^7952) Tetellurium (^12884) Popolonium– (^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Brbromine 8053 I iodine 12785 Atastatine– (^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Scscandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) Lalanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). actinium– (^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium^141 (^91) Paprotactinium 231 (^60) Ndneodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pmpromethium– (^93) Npneptunium– (^62) Smsamarium (^15094) Puplutonium– (^63) Eueuropium (^15295) Amamericium– (^64) Gdgadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bkberkelium– (^66) Dydysprosium 16398 Cfcalifornium– (^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Eseinsteinium– (^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Mdmendelevium– (^70) Ybytterbium (^173102) Nonobelium– (^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lrlawrencium– 


