 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 14 printed pages and 2 blank pages. IB17 06_0620_11/FP© UCLES 2017 [Turn over 

# *2950887077* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/11 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) May/June 2017 Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet^ 45 minutes Soft clean eraserSoft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil.Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unlessthis has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

There areanswers **A** (^) , **forty B** , **C** questions on this paper. Answerand **D**. **all** questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the **one** you consider correct and record your choice in **soft pencil** on the separate Answer Sheet. **Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully.** Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer.Any rough working should be done in this booklet. A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16.Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2017 0620/11/M/J/17 

**1** The diagram shows some changes of state. 

 solid liquid gas 

## P Q 

## R S 

 Which words describe the changes of state, P, Q, R and S? P Q R S A freezing boiling melting evaporation B melting evaporation freezing condensation C melting sublimation freezing evaporation D sublimation evaporation melting condensation 

**2** The diagram shows part of a thermometer. 

 31 

## 30 

 What is the reading on the thermometer? A 30.2 B 30.3 C 31.7 D 31.8 

**3** Pure water has a boiling point of 100 °C and a freezing point of 0 °C. What is the boiling point and freezing point of a sample of aqueous sodium chloride? boiling point / °C freezing point / °C **A** 98 –2 **B** 98 2 **C** 102 –2 **D** 102 2 


© UCLES 2017 0620/11/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

# 4 Pure copper(II) sulfate crystals can be made by adding copper(II) oxide to hot dilute sulfuric acid. 

# The copper(II) oxide is added until it ......1....... 

 The solution is ......2...... and then ......3...... to obtain the pure crystals. Which words complete gaps 1, 2 and 3? 1 2 3 A is in excess cooled filtered B is in excess filtered cooled C changes colour cooled filtered D changes colour filtered cooled 

**5** Which part of an atom has a relative mass of 1 and a relative charge of 0? **A** electron **B** neutron **C** nucleus **D** proton 

**6** Which molecule contains exactly two single covalent bonds? 

**A** C _l_ (^) 2 **B** CH 4 **C** H 2 O **D** HC _l_ **7** Sodium reacts with chlorine to form sodium chloride. Which statements describe what happens to the sodium atoms in this reaction? 1 Sodium atoms form positive ions. 2 Sodium atoms form negative ions. 3 Sodium atoms gain electrons. 4 Sodium atoms lose electrons. **A** 1 and 3 **B** 1 and 4 **C** 2 and 3 **D** 2 and 4 


© UCLES 2017 0620/11/M/J/17 

**8** Diamond is extremely hard and does not conduct electricity. Which statement explains these properties? **A** It has a lattice of positive carbon ions in a ‘sea of electrons’. 

**B** (^) carbon atoms.It has delocalised electrons and each carbon atom forms three covalent bonds with other **C** (^) carbon atoms.It has no delocalised electrons and each carbon atom forms four covalent bonds with other **D** It has strong ionic bonds between each carbon atom. **9** What is the relative formula mass of ammonium nitrate, NH 4 NO 3? **A** 80 **B** 108 **C** 122 **D** 150 **10** Concentrated aqueous sodium chloride is electrolysed. What is the main product formed at the positive electrode (anode)? **A** chlorine **B** hydrogen **C** oxygen **D** sodium **11** Some properties of four fuels are shown in the table. Which fuel is a gas at room temperature and makes two products when it burns in a plentifulsupply of air? fuel formula melting point/ °C boiling point/ °C **A** hydrogen H 2 –259 –253 **B** methane CH 4 –182 –164 **C** octane C 8 H 18 –57 126 **D** wax C 31 H 64 60 400 


© UCLES 2017 0620/11/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**12** Which statements about exothermic and endothermic reactions are correct? 1 During an exothermic reaction, heat is given out. 2 The temperature of an endothermic reaction goes up because heat is taken in. 3 Burning methane in the air is an exothermic reaction. **A** 1, 2 and 3 **B** 1 and 2 only **C** 1 and 3 only **D** 2 and 3 only 

**13** When sulfur is heated it undergoes a ......1...... change as it melts. Further heating causes the sulfur to undergo a ......2...... change and form sulfur dioxide. Which words complete gaps 1 and 2? 1 2 **A** chemical chemical **B** chemical physical **C** physical chemical **D** physical physical 

**14** Which row correctly matches the experiment and observations to the identity of the underlinedsubstance? 

 experiment and observations identity of the underlined substance 

# A Blue crystals are heated. The crystalsturn white and steam is given off. hydrated cobalt(II) chloride 

# B Pink crystals are heated. The crystalsturn blue and steam is given off. anhydrous cobalt(II) chloride 

# C Water is added to a blue solid.The blue solid turns pink. hydrated copper(II) sulfate 

# D Water is added to a white solid.The white solid turns blue. anhydrous copper(II) sulfate 


© UCLES 2017 0620/11/M/J/17 

**15** A student was investigating the reaction between marble chips and dilute hydrochloric acid. 

 bung 

 marble 

chips (^25) cm 3 of dilute hydrochloric acid gas syringe Which changes slow down the rate of reaction? temperatureof acid concentrationof acid of marble chipssurface area **A** decrease decrease decrease **B** decrease decrease increase **C** increase decrease decrease **D** increase increase increase **16** The reactions shown may occur in the air during a thunder-storm. N 2 + O 2 o 2NO 2NO + O 2 o 2NO 2 NO + O 3 o NO 2 + O 2 Which row shows what happens to the reactant molecules in each of these reactions? N 2 NO O 3 **A** oxidised oxidised oxidised **B** oxidised oxidised reduced **C** reduced reduced oxidised **D** reduced reduced reduced 


© UCLES 2017 0620/11/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**17** Hydrochloric acid is added to magnesium metal and to sodium carbonate in separate tests. Which row shows the observations? magnesium metal sodium carbonate **A** effervescence effervescence **B** effervescence no reaction **C** no reaction effervescence **D** no reaction no reaction 

**18** Which oxide dissolves in water to form a basic solution? **A** carbon dioxide **B** nitrogen dioxide **C** sodium oxide **D** sulfur dioxide 

**19** Which salt preparation uses a burette and a pipette? **A** calcium nitrate from calcium carbonate and nitric acid 

# B copper(II) sulfate from copper(II) hydroxide and sulfuric acid 

 C potassium chloride from potassium hydroxide and hydrochloric acid D zinc chloride from zinc and hydrochloric acid 

**20** Substance X reacts with warm dilute hydrochloric acid to produce a gas which decolourises 

# acidified aqueous potassium manganate(VII). 

 Substance X gives a yellow flame in a flame test. What is X? A potassium chloride B potassium sulfite C sodium chloride D sodium sulfite 


© UCLES 2017 0620/11/M/J/17 

**21** Part of the Periodic Table is shown. Which element is a soft solid that reacts violently with cold water? 

## D 

## C 

## A 

## B 

**22** Which element is less reactive than the other members of its group in the Periodic Table? **A** astatine **B** caesium **C** fluorine **D** rubidium 

**23** An element has the following properties. Ɣ It forms coloured compounds. Ɣ It acts as a catalyst. Ɣ It melts at 1539 °C. In which part of the Periodic Table is the element found? **A** Group I **B** Group VII **C** Group VIII **D** transition elements 

**24** Why are weather balloons sometimes filled with helium rather than hydrogen? **A** Helium is found in air. **B** Helium is less dense than hydrogen. **C** Helium is more dense than hydrogen. **D** Helium is unreactive. 


© UCLES 2017 0620/11/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**25** Element E: 

- forms an alloy 

- has a basic oxide 

- is below hydrogen in the reactivity series. What is E? **A** carbon **B** copper **C** sulfur **D** zinc 

**26** Some reactions of three metals and their oxides are shown. 

 metal metal reacts with dilutehydrochloric acid reacts with carbonmetal oxide S no yes T yes no U yes yes What is the order of reactivity of the metals? 

 reactiveleast reactivemost A S T U B S U T C T S U D U T S 

**27** Which statement about the extraction of iron in a blast furnace is **not** correct? **A** Calcium oxide reacts with acidic impurities. 

# B Iron(III) oxide is reduced to iron by carbon dioxide. 

 C Molten iron is formed at the base of the blast furnace. D The raw materials are hematite, limestone and coke. 


© UCLES 2017 0620/11/M/J/17 

**28** Stainless steel is an alloy of iron and other metals. It is strong and does not rust but it costs muchmore than normal steel. 

 What is not made from stainless steel? A cutlery B pipes in a chemical factory C railway lines D saucepans 

**29** The diagram shows some uses of water in the home. 

## 1 2 3 

 For which uses is it important for the water to have been treated? A 1 only B 2 only C 3 only D 1, 2 and 3 

**30** Which gas is colourless and poisonous? **A** carbon monoxide **B** chlorine **C** hydrogen **D** nitrogen 


© UCLES 2017 0620/11/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**31** Two experiments involving water are described. 

# 1 Water turns purple when potassium manganate(VII) is added to it. 

 2 Adding water to sodium causes the temperature to increase. Which row describes the role of water in 1 and 2? 1 2 A as a chemical reagent as a chemical reagent B as a chemical reagent as a solvent C as a solvent as a chemical reagent D as a solvent as a solvent 

**32** In which process is carbon dioxide **not** formed? **A** burning of natural gas **B** fermentation **C** heating lime **D** respiration 

**33** Which statement is **not** correct? **A** Converting limestone into lime is a thermal decomposition reaction. **B** Flue gas desulfurisation is a neutralisation reaction. **C** In the extraction of iron, calcium carbonate is converted into calcium oxide. **D** Slaked lime is added to soil as a fertiliser. 

**34** The structures of three substances are shown. 

 H C H 

## H 

## O H H C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## O H H C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## O H 

 Why do these substances all belong to the same homologous series? A They are all compounds. B They are all saturated. C They all contain oxygen. D They all contain the same functional group. 


© UCLES 2017 0620/11/M/J/17 

**35** Which fraction of petroleum is **not** matched to its correct use? 

 fraction use A bitumen making roads B gasoline fuel for cars C kerosene fuel for ships D naphtha chemical industry 

**36** Cracking is an important process in the petroleum industry. The products of cracking include ......1...... and an ......2...... of ......3...... relative molecular massthan the ......4...... that was cracked. Which words complete gaps 1, 2, 3 and 4? 1 2 3 4 **A** hydrogen alkane greater alkene **B** hydrogen alkene smaller alkane **C** steam alkane greater alkene **D** steam alkene smaller alkane 

**37** Which compound rapidly decolourises aqueous bromine? **A** ethane **B** ethanoic acid **C** ethanol **D** ethene 

**38** There are two methods for producing ethanol. method 1 catalytic addition of steam to ethene method 2 fermentation Which statement is **not** correct? **A** Method 1 produces carbon dioxide. **B** Method 1 requires high temperature and pressure. **C** Method 2 produces carbon dioxide. **D** Method 2 requires a source of sugar. 


© UCLES 2017 0620/11/M/J/17 

**39** Which statement about aqueous ethanoic acid is **not** correct? **A** It produces carbon dioxide when it reacts with magnesium carbonate. **B** It produces hydrogen when it reacts with magnesium. **C** It neutralises magnesium oxide. **D** It turns red litmus paper blue. 

**40** The diagram shows part of the molecule of a polymer. 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

 Which diagram shows the monomer from which this polymer could be manufactured? A B C D 

 H H H 

## H 

## C H C 

## H 

## H 

## C H 

## H 

## H 

## H C 

## H 

## H 

## C O 

## H 

## H 

## C C H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 


© UCLES 2017 0620/11/M/J/17 

## BLANK PAGE 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeInternational Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge LocalExaminations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2017 0620/11/M/J/17 

## BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2017 0620/11/M/J/17 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements^1 Hhydrogen^1 

(^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Beberyllium 9 **Key** atomic numberatomic symbol name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mgmagnesium 24 19 Kpotassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Srstrontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Gegermanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 (^22) Tititanium (^4840) Zrzirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rfrutherfordium– 23 Vvanadium (^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Crchromium (^5242) Momolybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sgseaborgium– (^25) Mnmanganese (^5543) Tctechnetium– (^75) Rerhenium (^186107) Bhbohrium– (^26) Feiron (^5644) Ruruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Ir iridium (^192109) Mtmeitnerium– (^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pdpalladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Dsdarmstadtium– (^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rgroentgenium– (^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cdcadmium (^11280) Hgmercury (^201112) Cncopernicium– 114 F _l_ flerovium– (^116) Lvlivermorium– (^7) Nnitrogen 14 15 Pphosphorus (^3133) Asarsenic (^7551) Sbantimony 12283 Bibismuth 209 (^8) Ooxygen 16 16 Ssulfur (^3234) Seselenium (^7952) Tetellurium (^12884) Popolonium– (^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Brbromine 8053 I iodine 12785 Atastatine– (^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Scscandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71lanthanoids 89–103actinoids (^57) Lalanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). actinium– (^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium^141 (^91) Paprotactinium 231 (^60) Ndneodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pmpromethium– (^93) Npneptunium– (^62) Smsamarium (^15094) Puplutonium– (^63) Eueuropium (^15295) Amamericium– (^64) Gdgadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bkberkelium– (^66) Dydysprosium 16398 Cfcalifornium– (^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Eseinsteinium– (^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Mdmendelevium– (^70) Ybytterbium (^173102) Nonobelium– (^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lrlawrencium– 


