 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all questions. Electronic calculators may be used. You may lose marks if you do not show your working or if you do not use appropriate units. Notes for use in qualitative analysis are provided on pages 7 and 8. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/52 

 Paper 5 Practical Test May/June 2017 1 hour 15 minutes Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: As listed in the Confidential Instructions 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

 This document consists of 8 printed pages. 

 [Turn over 

 IB17 06_0620_52/FP © UCLES 2017 

#  

 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 For Examiner’s Use 

 Total 


© UCLES 2017 0620/52/M/J/17 

# 1 You are going to investigate the reaction between aqueous potassium manganate(VII), solution A , 

# and two solutions of iron(II) sulfate, solution B and solution C , of different concentrations. 

 Read all the instructions carefully before starting the experiments. 

 Instructions You are going to carry out two experiments. 

 (a) Experiment 1 

 ● Fill the burette with solution A to the 0.0 cm^3 mark. ● Use a measuring cylinder to pour 25 cm 3 of solution B into the conical flask. ● Add 1 cm 3 of solution A from the burette to the flask, while swirling the flask. ● Continue to add solution A to the flask until the mixture just turns permanently pink. ● Record the burette reading in the table and complete the table. ● Pour away the contents of the flask and rinse the flask with distilled water. 

 final burette reading / cm 3 

 initial burette reading / cm 3 

 difference / cm 3 

 [2] 

 (b) Experiment 2 

 ● Repeat Experiment 1 using 25 cm 3 of solution C instead of solution B. ● Record the burette readings in the table and complete the table. 

 final burette reading / cm 3 

 initial burette reading / cm 3 

 difference / cm 3 

 [2] 


© UCLES 2017 0620/52/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

 (c) (i) How does the colour of solution A change when it is first added to the conical flask? 

 from ........................................................... to .............................................................. [1] 

 (ii) Why is an indicator not added to the conical flask? 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [1] 

# (d) (i) Which solution of iron(II) sulfate, solution B or solution C , is the more concentrated? 

 Explain your answer. 

## ............................................................................................................................................. 

## ....................................................................................................................................... [2] 

# (ii) How many times more concentrated is this solution of iron(II) sulfate? 

## ....................................................................................................................................... [1] 

 (e) (i) If Experiment 2 were repeated using 50 cm 3 of solution C , what volume of solution A would be needed? Explain your answer. 

 ............................................................................................................................................. 

## ....................................................................................................................................... [2] 

 (ii) Suggest a practical problem that using 50 cm 3 of solution C in this investigation would cause. Suggest a possible solution to the problem. 

 problem ............................................................................................................................... 

 solution ............................................................................................................................... [2] 

 (f) Give one advantage and one disadvantage of using a measuring cylinder instead of a 25 cm 3 pipette for solution B. 

 advantage .................................................................................................................................. 

 disadvantage ............................................................................................................................. [2] 

 [Total: 15] 


© UCLES 2017 0620/52/M/J/17 

**2** You are provided with two solids, **E** and **F** , which are both salts. Carry out the following tests on each solid, recording all of your observations at each stage. 

 tests on solid E 

 (a) Carry out a flame test on a sample of solid E. Record your observations. 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

 (b) Pour about 10 cm 3 of distilled water into a boiling tube. Measure the initial temperature of the water and record it in the table. Add the rest of solid E to the boiling tube and shake the boiling tube to dissolve solid E. Measure and record the temperature of the solution after 1 minute. Complete the table. 

 temperature of the solution after 1 minute / C 

 initial temperature of the water / C 

 temperature difference / C [2] 

 Divide the solution into three equal portions in three test-tubes and carry out the following tests. 

 (c) To the first portion of the solution, add about 2 cm 3 of dilute hydrochloric acid. Test the gas given off with a small strip of filter paper that has been dipped into 

# acidified aqueous potassium manganate(VII). 

 Record your observations. 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [3] 

 (d) To the second portion of the solution, add an excess of aqueous sodium hydroxide. Record your observations. 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

# (e) (i) Mix about 2 cm^3 of aqueous copper(II) sulfate and 2 cm 3 of aqueous potassium iodide. Add 

 a small amount of starch solution to the mixture. Leave the solution to stand for 5 minutes. Record your observations. 

 ............................................................................................................................................. 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [2] 

 (ii) Now add the third portion of the solution of E to the mixture in (e)(i). Record your observations. 

 ............................................................................................................................................. 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [2] 


© UCLES 2017 0620/52/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

 (f) What conclusions can you draw about solid E? 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [2] 

 tests on solid F 

 (g) Carry out a flame test on a sample of solid F. Record your observations. 

## .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

 Add the rest of solid F to about 5 cm^3 of distilled water in a test-tube. Shake the mixture to dissolve solid F. Divide the solution into two equal portions in two test-tubes. 

 (h) To the first portion of the solution, add about 1 cm 3 of dilute nitric acid and aqueous silver nitrate. Record your observations. 

## .............................................................................................................................................. [2] 

 (i) To the second portion of the solution, add excess aqueous sodium hydroxide. Record your observations. 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

 (j) Identify solid F. 

## .............................................................................................................................................. [2] 

 [Total: 19] 


© UCLES 2017 0620/52/M/J/17 

**3** Calcium carbonate and kaolinite are both white solids found in sedimentary rocks. 

 Calcium carbonate reacts with dilute hydrochloric acid to form aqueous calcium chloride. Kaolinite does not react with dilute acids. 

 You are provided with a mixture of calcium carbonate and kaolinite and access to dilute hydrochloric acid. 

 Plan an experiment to determine the percentage by mass of calcium carbonate in the mixture. 

## ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ..................................................................................................................................................... [6] 

 [Total: 6] 


© UCLES 2017 0620/52/M/J/17 

**Notes for use in qualitative analysis Tests for anions** 

 anion test test result 

 carbonate (CO 3 2–^ ) add dilute acid effervescence, carbon dioxide produced 

 chloride (C l –^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify with dilute nitric acid, then add aqueous silver nitrate 

 white ppt. 

 bromide (Br –^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify with dilute nitric acid, then add aqueous silver nitrate 

 cream ppt. 

 iodide (I–^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify with dilute nitric acid, then add aqueous silver nitrate 

 yellow ppt. 

 nitrate (NO 3 –^ ) [in solution] 

 add aqueous sodium hydroxide, then aluminium foil; warm carefully 

 ammonia produced 

 sulfate (SO 4 2–^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify, then add aqueous barium nitrate 

 white ppt. 

 sulfite (SO 3 2–^ ) add dilute hydrochloric acid, warm gently and test for the presence of sulfur dioxide 

 sulfur dioxide produced will turn acidified aqueous potassium 

# manganate(VII) from purple to 

 colourless 

**Tests for aqueous cations** 

 cation effect of aqueous sodium hydroxide effect of aqueous ammonia 

 aluminium (A l 3+^ ) white ppt., soluble in excess giving a colourless solution 

 white ppt., insoluble in excess 

 ammonium (NH 4 +) ammonia produced on warming – 

 calcium (Ca 2+^ ) white ppt., insoluble in excess no ppt., or very slight white ppt. 

# chromium(III) (Cr 3+^ ) green ppt., soluble in excess grey-green ppt., insoluble in excess 

# copper(II) (Cu 2+^ ) light blue ppt., insoluble in excess light blue ppt., soluble in excess, 

 giving a dark blue solution 

# iron(II) (Fe2+^ ) green ppt., insoluble in excess green ppt., insoluble in excess 

# iron(III) (Fe3+^ ) red-brown ppt., insoluble in excess red-brown ppt., insoluble in excess 

 zinc (Zn 2+^ ) white ppt., soluble in excess, giving a colourless solution 

 white ppt., soluble in excess, giving a colourless solution 


© UCLES 2017 0620/52/M/J/17 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

**Tests for gases Flame tests for metal ions** 

 gas test and test results metal ion flame colour 

 ammonia (NH 3 ) turns damp, red litmus paper blue lithium (Li +) red 

 carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) turns limewater milky sodium (Na +) yellow 

chlorine (C _l_ (^) 2 ) bleaches damp litmus paper potassium (K +) lilac hydrogen (H 2 ) ‘pops’ with a lighted splint (^) copper(II) (Cu 2+^ ) blue-green oxygen (O 2 ) relights a glowing splint sulfur dioxide (SO 2 ) turns acidified aqueous 

# potassium manganate(VII) from 

 purple to colourless 


