 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 13 printed pages and 3 blank pages. IB17 06_0620_13/3RP© UCLES 2017 [Turn over 

# *9908340552* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/13 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) May/June 2017 Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet^ 45 minutes Soft clean eraserSoft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil.Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unlessthis has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

There areanswers **A** (^) , **forty B** , **C** questions on this paper. Answerand **D**. **all** questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the **one** you consider correct and record your choice in **soft pencil** on the separate Answer Sheet. **Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully.** Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer.Any rough working should be done in this booklet. A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16.Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2017 0620/13/M/J/17 

**1** Diagrams R, S and T represent the three states of matter. 

## R S T 

 Which change occurs during freezing? A R → S B S → T C T → R D T → S 

**2** A student needs to measure 22 cm^3 of water at 40 °C. Which apparatus is required? **A** beaker and stopwatch **B** beaker and thermometer **C** measuring cylinder and stopwatch **D** measuring cylinder and thermometer 

**3** A compound, X, has a melting point of 71 °C and a boiling point of 375 °C. Which statement about X is correct? **A** It is a liquid at 52 °C and a gas at 175 °C. **B** It is a liquid at 69 °C and a gas at 380 °C. **C** It is a liquid at 75 °C and a gas at 350 °C. **D** It is a liquid at 80 °C and a gas at 400 °C. 

**4** Which method is used to obtain a concentrated solution of ethanol from a dilute solution ofethanol dissolved in water? 

 A crystallisation B distillation C filtration D paper chromatography 


© UCLES 2017 0620/13/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**5** Which definition of isotopes is correct? **A** atoms of the same element that have the same number of electrons and nucleons **B** atoms of the same element that have the same number of neutrons and protons **C** atoms of the same element that have the same number of protons but a different number of electrons **D** atoms of the same element that have the same number of protons but a different number ofnucleons 

**6** Which statement about a molecule of ammonia, NH 3 , is correct? **A** Each hydrogen atom donates a pair of electrons to a nitrogen atom. **B** There are double covalent bonds between the nitrogen atom and the hydrogen atoms. **C** There are single covalent bonds between its hydrogen atoms. **D** There are three shared pairs of electrons in the molecule. 

**7** The electronic structures of atoms Q and R are shown. 

## Q R 

 Q and R form an ionic compound. What is the formula of the compound? A QR 7 B Q 2 R 4 C QR D Q 7 R 

**8** Which substance is a macromolecule? **A** ammonia **B** carbon dioxide **C** diamond **D** water 

**9** What is the relative formula mass of aluminium oxide, A _l_ (^) 2 O 3? **A** 43 **B** 70 **C** 102 **D** 113 


© UCLES 2017 0620/13/M/J/17 

**10** Which products are initially obtained at each electrode during the electrolysis of concentratedaqueous sodium chloride? 

 cathode anode A hydrogen chlorine B hydrogen oxygen C sodium chlorine D sodium oxygen 

**11** Heat energy is produced when hydrocarbons burn in air. Which equations represent this statement? 1 C 2 H 5 OH + 3O 2 → 2CO 2 + 3H 2 O 2 C 2 H 4 + 3O 2 → 2CO 2 + 2H 2 O 3 CH 4 + 2O 2 → CO 2 + 2H 2 O **A** 1, 2 and 3 **B** 1 and 2 only **C** 1 and 3 only **D** 2 and 3 only 

**12** Which statements about exothermic and endothermic reactions are correct? 1 During an exothermic reaction, heat is given out. 2 The temperature of an endothermic reaction goes up because heat is taken in. 3 Burning methane in the air is an exothermic reaction. **A** 1, 2 and 3 **B** 1 and 2 only **C** 1 and 3 only **D** 2 and 3 only 

**13** Which changes are physical changes? 1 melting ice to form water 2 burning hydrogen to form water 3 adding sodium to water 4 boiling water to form steam **A** 1 and 2 **B** 1 and 4 **C** 2 and 3 **D** 3 and 4 


© UCLES 2017 0620/13/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

# 14 Which colour change is seen when hydrated cobalt(II) chloride is heated so that it becomes 

# anhydrous cobalt(II) chloride? 

 A blue to pink B blue to white C pink to blue D white to blue 

**15** A student was investigating the reaction between marble chips and dilute hydrochloric acid. 

 bung 

 marble 

chips (^25) cm^3 of dilute hydrochloric acid gas syringe Which changes slow down the rate of reaction? temperature of acid concentration of acid surface area of marble chips **A** decrease decrease decrease **B** decrease decrease increase **C** increase decrease decrease **D** increase increase increase 


© UCLES 2017 0620/13/M/J/17 

**16** The reactions shown may occur in the air during a thunder-storm. N 2 + O 2 → 2NO 2NO + O 2 → 2NO 2 NO + O 3 → NO 2 + O 2 Which row shows what happens to the reactant molecules in each of these reactions? N 2 NO O 3 **A** oxidised oxidised oxidised **B** oxidised oxidised reduced **C** reduced reduced oxidised **D** reduced reduced reduced 

**17** Three separate experiments are carried out on a solution of substance X. 1 A gas is produced when X is heated with ammonium chloride. 2 Methyl orange is yellow when added to X. 3 There is no reaction between X and sodium carbonate. Which type of substance is X? **A** acid **B** base **C** indicator **D** salt 

**18** Farmers spread slaked lime (calcium hydroxide) on their fields to neutralise soils that are too acidic for crops to grow well. Which ion in slaked lime neutralises the acid in the soil? **A** Ca 2+^ **B** H+^ **C** O2–^ **D** OH– 

**19** Which salt preparation uses a burette and a pipette? **A** calcium nitrate from calcium carbonate and nitric acid 

# B copper(II) sulfate from copper(II) hydroxide and sulfuric acid 

 C potassium chloride from potassium hydroxide and hydrochloric acid D zinc chloride from zinc and hydrochloric acid 


© UCLES 2017 0620/13/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**20** Aqueous sodium hydroxide reacts with an aqueous solution of compound Y to give a greenprecipitate. 

 Aqueousprecipitate. ammonia also reacts with an aqueous solution of compound Y to give a green In each case the precipitate is insoluble when an excess of reagent is added. Which ion is present in Y? 

# A chromium(III) 

# B copper(II) 

# C iron(II) 

# D iron(III) 

**21** Period 3 of the Periodic Table is shown. 

 Na Mg A l Si P S C l Ar What increases from left to right across Period 3? A density B melting point C non-metallic character D the number of electron shells 

**22** Which element is less reactive than the other members of its group in the Periodic Table? **A** astatine **B** caesium **C** fluorine **D** rubidium 


© UCLES 2017 0620/13/M/J/17 

**23** An element has the following properties. ● It forms coloured compounds. ● It acts as a catalyst. ● It melts at 1539 °C. In which part of the Periodic Table is the element found? **A** Group I **B** Group VII **C** Group VIII **D** transition elements 

**24** Why are weather balloons sometimes filled with helium rather than hydrogen? **A** Helium is found in air. **B** Helium is less dense than hydrogen. **C** Helium is more dense than hydrogen. **D** Helium is unreactive. 

**25** Element E: 

- forms an alloy 

- has a basic oxide 

- is below hydrogen in the reactivity series. What is E? **A** carbon **B** copper **C** sulfur **D** zinc 


© UCLES 2017 0620/13/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**26** Which row shows how the metal reacts? 

 metal reacts withdilute acid reacts rapidly withcold water reacts withsteam A calcium    B copper    C magnesium    D zinc    

**27** Which statement about the extraction of iron from hematite is correct? **A** Air is blown into the blast furnace to oxidise the molten iron. **B** Carbon dioxide is reduced by coke to carbon monoxide. **C** Hematite is oxidised by carbon to molten iron. **D** The slag produced is denser than molten iron. 

**28** Stainless steel is an alloy of iron and other metals. It is strong and does not rust but it costs muchmore than normal steel. 

 What is not made from stainless steel? A cutlery B pipes in a chemical factory C railway lines D saucepans 

**29** The diagram shows some uses of water in the home. 

## 1 2 3 

 For which uses is it important for the water to have been treated? A 1 only B 2 only C 3 only D 1, 2 and 3 


© UCLES 2017 0620/13/M/J/17 

**30** Which pollutant gasnatural gas)? **cannot** be produced by the combustion of fossil fuels (coal, petroleum and 

 A carbon monoxide B methane C nitrogen dioxide D sulfur dioxide 

**31** A farmer wrongly adds two substances to the soil at the same time. They react together to form a gas which turns damp red litmus blue. What are the two substances? **A** a basic oxide and a potassium salt **B** a basic oxide and an ammonium salt **C** an acidic oxide and a potassium salt **D** an acidic oxide and an ammonium salt 

**32** In which process is carbon dioxide **not** formed? **A** burning of natural gas **B** fermentation **C** heating lime **D** respiration 

**33** Two equations are shown. 

reaction 1 CaCO 3 → CaO + CO (^2) reaction 2 CaO + H 2 O → Ca(OH) (^2) Which terms describe reactions 1 and 2? reaction 1 reaction 2 **A** reduction hydration **B** reduction hydrolysis **C** thermal decomposition hydration **D** thermal decomposition hydrolysis 


© UCLES 2017 0620/13/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**34** The structures of three substances are shown. 

 H C H 

## H 

## O H H C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## O H H C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## O H 

 Why do these substances all belong to the same homologous series? A They are all compounds. B They are all saturated. C They all contain oxygen. D They all contain the same functional group. 

**35** Fuel oil, gasoline, kerosene and naphtha are four fractions obtained from the fractional distillation of petroleum. What is the order of the boiling points of these fractions? highest boiling point → lowest boiling point **A** fuel oil → kerosene → gasoline → naphtha **B** fuel oil → kerosene → naphtha → gasoline **C** gasoline → naphtha → kerosene → fuel oil **D** naphtha → gasoline → kerosene → fuel oil 

**36** Which process produces alkenes from alkanes? **A** combustion **B** cracking **C** fermentation **D** polymerisation 


© UCLES 2017 0620/13/M/J/17 

**37** Poly(ethene) is made from ethene. Ethene is ......1...... hydrocarbon because it contains a carbon to carbon ......2...... bond. The general name given to small molecules that undergo polymerisation is ......3....... Which words complete gaps 1, 2 and 3? 1 2 3 **A** an unsaturated double monomers **B** an unsaturated single alkenes **C** a saturated double alkenes **D** a saturated single monomers 

**38** Which reaction is used to manufacture ethanol? **A** reacting ethane with oxygen in the presence of a catalyst **B** reacting ethane with steam in the presence of a catalyst **C** reacting ethene with steam in the presence of a catalyst **D** reacting glucose with steam in the presence of a catalyst 

**39** Which statement about aqueous ethanoic acid is **not** correct? **A** It effervesces with sodium carbonate. **B** It neutralises aqueous sodium hydroxide. **C** It turns blue litmus from blue to red. **D** It turns methyl orange from orange to yellow. 

**40** The diagram shows part of the molecule of a polymer. 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

 Which diagram shows the monomer from which this polymer could be manufactured? A B C D 

 H H H 

## H 

## C H C 

## H 

## H 

## C H 

## H 

## H 

## H C 

## H 

## H 

## C O 

## H 

## H 

## C C H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 


© UCLES 2017 0620/13/M/J/17 

## BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2017 0620/13/M/J/17 

## BLANK PAGE 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeInternational Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge LocalExaminations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2017 0620/13/M/J/17 

## BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2017 0620/13/M/J/17 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements^1 Hhydrogen^1 

(^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Beberyllium 9 **Key** atomic numberatomic symbol name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mgmagnesium 24 19 Kpotassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Srstrontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Gegermanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 (^22) Tititanium (^4840) Zrzirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rfrutherfordium– 23 Vvanadium (^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Crchromium (^5242) Momolybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sgseaborgium– (^25) Mnmanganese (^5543) Tctechnetium– (^75) Rerhenium (^186107) Bhbohrium– (^26) Feiron (^5644) Ruruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Iriridium (^192109) Mtmeitnerium– (^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pdpalladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Dsdarmstadtium– (^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rgroentgenium– (^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cdcadmium (^11280) Hgmercury (^201112) Cncopernicium– 114 F _l_ flerovium– (^116) Lvlivermorium– (^7) Nnitrogen 1415 Pphosphorus (^3133) Asarsenic (^7551) Sbantimony 12283 Bibismuth 209 (^8) Ooxygen 1616 Ssulfur (^3234) Seselenium (^7952) Tetellurium (^12884) Popolonium– (^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Brbromine 8053 I iodine 12785 Atastatine– (^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Scscandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) Lalanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). actinium– (^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium^141 (^91) Paprotactinium 231 (^60) Ndneodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pmpromethium– (^93) Npneptunium– (^62) Smsamarium (^15094) Puplutonium– (^63) Eueuropium (^15295) Amamericium– (^64) Gdgadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bkberkelium– (^66) Dydysprosium 16398 Cfcalifornium– (^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Eseinsteinium– (^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Mdmendelevium– (^70) Ybytterbium (^173102) Nonobelium– (^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lrlawrencium– 


