 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all questions. Electronic calculators may be used. You may lose marks if you do not show your working or if you do not use appropriate units. Notes for use in qualitative analysis are provided on pages 7 and 8. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/53 

 Paper 5 Practical Test May/June 2017 1 hour 15 minutes Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: As listed in the Confidential Instructions 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

 This document consists of 8 printed pages. 

 [Turn over 

 IB17 06_0620_53/3RP © UCLES 2017 

# *1598429303* 

 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 For Examiner’s Use 

 Total 


**©UCLES 2017 0620/53/M/J/17** 

**1** You are going to investigate the rate of reaction between magnesium ribbon and two different solutions of dilute sulfuric acid, solution **G** and solution **H**. The acid is in excess in both experiments. 

 Read all the instructions carefully before starting the experiments. 

 Instructions You are going to carry out two experiments. 

 (a) Experiment 1 

 ● Set up the apparatus as shown in the diagram. 

 trough 

 water 

 conical flask 

 bung 

 rubber connector 

 inverted 100 cm^3 measuring cylinder 

 clamp 

 ● Remove the bung from the conical flask and place one piece of magnesium ribbon into the conical flask. ● Use another measuring cylinder to measure 50 cm^3 of solution G. Pour solution G into the flask and replace the bung firmly. Immediately start the timer. Measure the total volume of gas collected in the measuring cylinder every 20 seconds for 180 seconds (3 minutes) or until 100 cm^3 of gas have been collected. Record your results in the table. 

 time / s 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 

 volume of gas / cm 3 

## [2] 

 ● Empty the flask and rinse it with distilled water. 

 (b) Experiment 2 

 ● Repeat Experiment 1 using 50 cm^3 of solution H instead of solution G. ● Measure the total volume of gas collected in the measuring cylinder every 20 seconds for 180 seconds (3 minutes) or until 100 cm^3 of gas have been collected. Record your results in the table. 

 time / s 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 

 volume of gas / cm 3 

## [2] 


 ©UCLES 2017 0620/53/M/J/17 [Turn over 

 (c) Plot the results for Experiments 1 and 2 on the grid and draw two smooth line graphs. Clearly label your graphs. 

## 0 20 40 60 

 time / s 

## 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 

## 100 

## 90 

## 80 

## 70 

## 60 

## 50 

## 40 

## 30 

## 20 

## 10 

## 0 

 volume of gas 

 /^ cm 

3 

## [4] 

 (d) Which experiment had the faster rate of reaction? Suggest a reason why the rate was faster in this experiment. 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [2] 


**©UCLES 2017 0620/53/M/J/17** 

 (e) The average rate of this reaction can be calculated using the equation shown. 

 average rate = 

 volume of gas / cm^3 time taken / s 

 For Experiment 1, calculate the average rate of reaction for the first 30 seconds of the reaction. Include the units. 

 rate = ............................ 

 units = ............................ [3] 

 (f) Why, eventually, will no more gas be produced? 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

 (g) Suggest the effect on the rate of reaction of using the same mass of magnesium powder instead of magnesium ribbon. Explain your answer. 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [2] 

 (h) Give one advantage and one disadvantage of using a measuring cylinder to measure the volumes of solution G and solution H. 

 advantage .................................................................................................................................. 

 disadvantage ............................................................................................................................. [2] 

 (i) Suggest one improvement to these experiments. 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

 [Total: 19] 


**©UCLES 2017 0620/53/M/J/17 [Turn over** 

**2** You are provided with two substances, solid **J** and solution **K**. Carry out the following tests on each substance, recording all of your observations at each stage. 

 tests on solid J 

 (a) Describe the appearance of solid J. 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

 (b) (i) Use a spatula to place half of solid J into a boiling tube. Add about 2 cm^3 of dilute hydrochloric acid to solid J. Heat the mixture. Test the gas given off with damp litmus paper. Record your observations. 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [1] 

 (ii) Allow the mixture to settle, pour off the liquid and add an excess of aqueous sodium hydroxide to the liquid. Record your observations. 

## ....................................................................................................................................... [2] 

 (c) Name the gas given off in (b)(i). 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

 Keep the rest of solid J for the test in (g). 

 tests on solution K 

 Divide solution K into four equal portions in four test-tubes. 

# (d) Add a small spatula measure of iron(II)^ sulfate^ crystals^ to^ the^ first^ portion^ of^ the^ solution. 

 Shake the mixture and add aqueous sodium hydroxide to the mixture. Record your observations. 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [3] 

 (e) Add a few drops of dilute sulfuric acid to the second portion of the solution followed by about 1 cm^3 of aqueous potassium iodide. Shake the mixture. Add a few drops of starch solution to the mixture. Record your observations. 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [2] 


**©UCLES 2017 0620/53/M/J/17** 

 (f) Add a few drops of dilute sulfuric acid to the third portion of the solution. Then add a few drops 

# of potassium manganate(VII) solution. 

 Record your observations. 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

 (g) Add the rest of solid J to the fourth portion of the solution. Test the gas given off with a splint. Record your observations. 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [3] 

 (h) Name the gas given off in (g). 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

 [Total: 15] 

**3** Cassiterite is a naturally occurring form of tin oxide. 

 Describe how you would ● obtain a sample of tin from a large lump of cassiterite in the laboratory, ● determine the percentage by mass of tin present in cassiterite. 

 Tin is similar in reactivity to iron. 

 Your answer should include any apparatus and chemicals used and the conditions required. 

 ........................................................................................................................................................... 

 ........................................................................................................................................................... 

 ........................................................................................................................................................... 

 ........................................................................................................................................................... 

 ........................................................................................................................................................... 

 ........................................................................................................................................................... 

 ........................................................................................................................................................... 

 ........................................................................................................................................................... 

 ..................................................................................................................................................... [6] 

 [Total: 6] 


**©UCLES 2017 0620/53/M/J/17** 

**Notes for use in qualitative analysis Tests for anions** 

 anion test test result 

 carbonate (CO 3 2–^ ) add dilute acid effervescence, carbon dioxide produced 

 chloride (C l –^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify with dilute nitric acid, then add aqueous silver nitrate 

 white ppt. 

 bromide (Br –^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify with dilute nitric acid, then add aqueous silver nitrate 

 cream ppt. 

 iodide (I–^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify with dilute nitric acid, then add aqueous silver nitrate 

 yellow ppt. 

 nitrate (NO 3 –^ ) [in solution] 

 add aqueous sodium hydroxide, then aluminium foil; warm carefully 

 ammonia produced 

 sulfate (SO 4 2–^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify, then add aqueous barium nitrate 

 white ppt. 

 sulfite (SO 3 2–^ ) add dilute hydrochloric acid, warm gently and test for the presence of sulfur dioxide 

 sulfur dioxide produced will turn acidified aqueous potassium 

# manganate(VII) from purple to 

 colourless 

**Tests for aqueous cations** 

 cation effect of aqueous sodium hydroxide effect of aqueous ammonia 

 aluminium (A l 3+^ ) white ppt., soluble in excess giving a colourless solution 

 white ppt., insoluble in excess 

 ammonium (NH 4 +^ ) ammonia produced on warming – 

 calcium (Ca 2+^ ) white ppt., insoluble in excess no ppt., or very slight white ppt. 

# chromium(III) (Cr 3+^ ) green ppt., soluble in excess grey-green ppt., insoluble in excess 

# copper(II) (Cu 2+^ ) light blue ppt., insoluble in excess light blue ppt., soluble in excess, 

 giving a dark blue solution 

# iron(II) (Fe2+^ ) green ppt., insoluble in excess green ppt., insoluble in excess 

# iron(III) (Fe3+^ ) red-brown ppt., insoluble in excess red-brown ppt., insoluble in excess 

 zinc (Zn2+^ ) white ppt., soluble in excess, giving a colourless solution 

 white ppt., soluble in excess, giving a colourless solution 


 ©UCLES 2017 0620/53/M/J/17 

 Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. E v ery reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

**o avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the C ambridge InternationalT Examinations C opyright A cknowledgements B ooklet. T his is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. Cambridge International E xaminations is part of the C ambridge A ssessment Group. C ambridge A ssessment is the brand name of U niversity of C ambridge L ocal Examinations S yndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the U niversity of C ambridge.** 

 Tests for gases Flame tests for metal ions 

 gas test and test results metal ion flame colour 

 ammonia (NH 3 ) turns damp, red litmus paper blue lithium (Li +) red 

 carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) turns limewater milky sodium (Na +) yellow 

chlorine (C _l_ (^) 2 ) bleaches damp litmus paper potassium (K+) lilac 

# hydrogen (H 2 ) ‘pops’ with a lighted splint copper(II) (Cu 2+^ ) blue-green 

 oxygen (O 2 ) relights a glowing splint 

 sulfur dioxide (SO 2 ) turns acidified aqueous 

# potassium manganate(VII) from 

 purple to colourless 


