 This document consists of 16 printed pages. DC (NF/FD) 106874/3 © UCLES 2016 [Turn over 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

* 5 7 6 4 7 8 3 2 7 3 * 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/22 Paper 2 February/March 2016 2 hours Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. Answer all the questions. Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 


© UCLES 2016 0606/22/F/M/16 

 Mathematical Formulae 

## 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, x = − b^^ b a^ − ac 

(^2 4) 2 _Binomial Theorem_ ( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( _n_ 1 ) _an_ –1^ _b_ + (^) ( _n_ 2 ) _an_ –2^ _b_^2 + … + (^) ( _nr_ ) _an_ – _r_^ _br_^ + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( _nr_ ) = (^) ( _n_ – _n_! _r_ )! _r_! 

## 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ 

 sin^2 A + cos^2 A = 1 sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC_ 

 a sin A =^ 

 b sin B =^ 

 c sin C 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

 ∆ = 12 bc sin A 


© UCLES 2016 0606/22/F/M/16 **[Turn over** 

**1** Two variables _x_ and _y_ are such that _y x_ 9 

## = 5 

## 

 for x 2 9. 

**(i)** Find an expression for (^) dd _xy_^. [2] **(ii)** Hence, find the approximate change in _y_ as _x_ increases from 13 to 13 + _h_ , where _h_ is small. [2] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/22/F/M/16 

**2** The sets _A_ , _B_ and _C_ are such that , , , , ,. _C A B C A B B B C A B_ 

## 2 

## 12 

## 14 

## 19 

 n n n n 

## + 

## + 

## , 

## , 

## Q 

## 1 = = = = = 

 ^ ^ ^ ^ 

 h h h h 

 Complete the Venn diagram to show the sets A , B and C and hence state n ^ A + B l + C lh. 

  

 n ^^ A + B l^ + C lh^ = ..................................................................... [4] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/22/F/M/16 **[Turn over** 

**3** Find the equation of the curve which passes through the point (1, 7) and for which (^) _x_^ _y x_ 9 _x_ 3 d d 2 4 = -^. [4] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/22/F/M/16 

**4 (a)** f ^ h _x_ = _a_ cos _bx_ + _c_ has a period of 60°, an amplitude of 10 and is such that f (0) = 14. State the values of _a_ , _b_ and _c_. [2] 

 (b) Sketch the graph of y = 3 sin 4 x 2 for 0 ° G x G 180°on the axes below. [3] 

## O 45° 

 y 

 90° 135° 180° x 


© UCLES 2016 0606/22/F/M/16 **[Turn over** 

**5 (i)** Find, in ascending powers of _x_ , the first 3 terms of the expansion of ^ 3 + _kx_ h^7 , where _k_ is a constant. Give each term in its simplest form. [3] 

 (ii) Given that, in the expansion of ^ 3 + kx h^7 , the coefficient of x^2 is twice the coefficient of x , find the value of k. [2] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/22/F/M/16 

**6 Do not use a calculator in this question.** 

 x 

## 1 + 3 3 

## 6 + 2 3 5 3 

 The diagram shows two parallelograms that are similar. The base and height, in centimetres, of each parallelogram is shown. Given that x , the height of the smaller parallelogram, is p^ + 6 q^3 , find the value of each of the integers p and q. [5] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/22/F/M/16 **[Turn over** 

**7 (a)** Given that **A** = -^426084 

## J 

## L 

## KK 

## N 

## P 

 OO and 6 7 

## 1 

## 2 

## 2 

**B** = (^) 1 

## J 

## L 

## KK 

## N 

## P 

 OO , find A − 3 B. [2] 

 (b) Given that C = -^2401 

## J 

## L 

## KK 

## N 

## P 

 OO and 4 3 

## 3 

## D = 5 

## J 

## L 

## KK 

## N 

## P 

 OO , find 

 (i) the inverse matrix C −1, [2] 

 (ii) the matrix X such that XD −1^ = C. [3] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/22/F/M/16 

**8** The line 2 _y_ = _x_ + 2 meets the curve 3 _x_^2 + _xy_ _y_^2 = 12 at the points _A_ and _B_. 

 (i) Find the coordinates of the points A and B. [5] 

 (ii) Given that the point C has coordinates (0, 6), show that the triangle ABC is right-angled. [2] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/22/F/M/16 **[Turn over** 

## 9 

## P 

 1 m 

 x m 

## Q T R 

 rad 

## S 

 i 

 PQRS is a quadrilateral with PS parallel to QR. The perimeter of PQRS is 3 m. The length of PQ is 1 m and the length of PS is x m. The point T is on QR such that ST is parallel to PQ. Angle SRT is q radians. 

 (i) Find an expression for x in terms of q. [3] 

 (ii) Show that the area, A m^2 , of PQRS is given by A = 1 cosec 2^ i. [2] 

 (iii) Hence find the exact value of q when A = c 1 33 m^ m^2. [2] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/22/F/M/16 

**10 (a)** The vectors **p** and **q** are such that **p** = 11 **i** − 24 **j** and **q** = 2 **i** + a **j**. 

 (i) Find the value of each of the constants a and b such that p + 2 q = ( a + b) i − 20 j. [3] 

 (ii) Using the values of a and b found in part (i) , find the unit vector in the direction p + 2 q. [2] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/22/F/M/16 **[Turn over** 

 (b) 

## O 

## B 

## C 

## A 

 a 

 b 

 The points A and B have position vectors a and b with respect to an origin O. The point C lies on AB and is such that AB : AC is 1 : l. Find an expression for OC in terms of a , b and l. [3] 

 (c) The points S and T have position vectors s and t with respect to an origin O. The points O , S and T do not lie in a straight line. Given that the vector 2 s + m t is parallel to the vector ( m + 3) s + 9 t , where m is a positive constant, find the value of m. [3] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/22/F/M/16 

**11** A curve has equation _y x_ 

 x 

(^21) 

## = 

## + 

## . 

 (i) Find the coordinates of the stationary points of the curve. [5] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/22/F/M/16 **[Turn over** 

 (ii) Show that x 

 y x 

 px qx d 1 

 d 2 

 2 2 

 3 

= (^) + 3 

## + 

 ^ h 

 , where p and q are integers to be found, and determine the nature of 

 the stationary points of the curve. [5] 

 Question 12 is printed on the next page. 


© UCLES 2016 0606/22/F/M/16 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

**12** A particle _P_ is projected from the origin _O_ so that it moves in a straight line. At time _t_ seconds after projection, the velocity of the particle, _v_ ms−1, is given by 

 v = 9 t^2 63 t + 90. 

 (i) Show that P first comes to instantaneous rest when t = 2. [2] 

 (ii) Find the acceleration of P when t = 3.5. [2] 

 (iii) Find an expression for the displacement of P from O at time t seconds. [3] 

 (iv) Find the distance travelled by P 

 (a) in the first 2 seconds, [2] 

 (b) in the first 3 seconds. [2] 


