 This document consists of 16 printed pages. 

 DC (LEG/FD) 106873/3 © UCLES 2016 [Turn over 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

* 9 2 4 2 8 1 9 0 7 2 * 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/12 Paper 1 February/March 2016 2 hours Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all the questions. Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 


© UCLES 2016 0606/12/F/M/16 

 Mathematical Formulae 

### 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

 x 

 b b ac a 

 = 

 − 2 − 4 2 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( _n_ 

# 1 ) a 

_n_ –1 (^) _b_ + 

# ( 

 n 

# 2 ) a 

_n_ –2 (^) _b_ (^2) + … + 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) a 

_n_ – _r_ (^) _br_ (^) + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( _n_ 

# r ) =^ 

 n! ( n – r )! r! 

### 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ 

 sin^2 A + cos^2 A = 1 

 sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A 

 cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC_ 

 a sin A =^ 

 b sin B =^ 

 c sin C 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

 ∆ = 

### 1 

 2 bc^ sin^ A 


© UCLES 2016 0606/12/F/M/16 **[Turn over** 

**1** Find the values of _a_ for which the line _y_ = _ax_ + 9 intersects the curve _y_ =2 _x_^2 + 3 _x_ + 1 at 2 distinct points. [4] 

**2** Given that _p q r_ 

 p qr p q ra^ b^ c 3 

(^1 2 3) 2 21 = 

- 

- -     , find the values of _a_ , _b_ and _c_. [3] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/12/F/M/16 

**3** Solve log 5 _x_ + log 25 _x_ = 3. [3] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/12/F/M/16 **[Turn over** 

**4 (i)** On the axes below, sketch the graphs of _y_ = 2 _x_ and _y_ = 3 + 2 _x_. [4] 

### –9 

### 9 

### –6 6 

 x 

 y 

### 0 

 (ii) Solve 3 + 2 x = 2 x. [3] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/12/F/M/16 

**5 (a)** A 6-character password is to be chosen from the following 9 characters. 

 letters A B E F numbers 5 8 9 

 symbols * $ 

 Each character may be used only once in any password. 

 Find the number of different 6-character passwords that may be chosen if 

 (i) there are no restrictions, [1] 

 (ii) the password must consist of 2 letters, 2 numbers and 2 symbols, in that order, [2] 

 (iii) the password must start and finish with a symbol. [2] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/12/F/M/16 **[Turn over** 

 (b) An examination consists of a section A, containing 10 short questions, and a section B, containing 5 long questions. Candidates are required to answer 6 questions from section A and 3 questions from section B. Find the number of different selections of questions that can be made if 

 (i) there are no further restrictions, [2] 

 (ii) candidates must answer the first 2 questions in section A and the first question in section B. [2] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/12/F/M/16 

**6** A function f is such that f ^ h _x_ = 6 +e^4 _x_ for _x_! R. 

 (i) Write down the range of f. [1] 

 (ii) Find f -^1 ^ h x and state its domain and range. [4] 

 (iii) Find f l^ h x. [1] 

 (iv) Hence find the exact solution of f ^ x h = f l^ x h. [2] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/12/F/M/16 **[Turn over** 

**7** The polynomial f ^ h _x_ = _ax_^3 + 7 _x_^2 9 _x_ + _b_ is divisible by 2 _x_ 1. The remainder when f ^ h _x_ is divided by _x_ 2 is 5 times the remainder when f ^ h _x_ is divided by _x_ + 1. 

 (i) Show that a = 6 and find the value of b. [4] 

 (ii) Using the values from part (i) , show that f ^ x h = ^ 2 x 1 h ^ cx^2 + dx + e h, where c , d and e are integers to be found. [2] 

 (iii) Hence factorise f ^ h x completely. [2] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/12/F/M/16 

### 8 

 lg y 

 0 lg x 

### (1.3, 3) 

### (2.55, 4.5) 

 The variables x and y are such that when lg y is plotted against lg x the straight line graph shown above is obtained. 

 (i) Given that y = Axb , find the value of A and of b. [5] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/12/F/M/16 **[Turn over** 

 (ii) Find the value of lg y when x = 100. [2] 

 (iii) Find the value of x when y = 8000. [2] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/12/F/M/16 

### 9 

### A 

### O C 

### B 

 r^ cm 

 i rad 

 The diagram shows a circle, centre O , radius r cm. Points A , B and C are such that A and B lie on the circle and the tangents at A and B meet at C. Angle AOB = i radians. 

 (i) Given that the area of the major sector AOB is 7 times the area of the minor sector AOB , find the value of i. [2] 

 (ii) Given also that the perimeter of the minor sector AOB is 20 cm, show that the value of r , correct to 2 decimal places, is 7.18. [2] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/12/F/M/16 **[Turn over** 

 (iii) Using the values of i and r from parts (i) and (ii) , find the perimeter of the shaded region ABC. [3] 

 (iv) Find the area of the shaded region ABC. [3] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/12/F/M/16 

**10 (i)** Find (^) dd _x_^ _x_ ( 2 _x_ 1 ) 2 3 1 

### 

### J 1 

### L 

### KK 

### N 

### P 

### OO. [3] 

 (ii) Hence, show that x x d x 

 x 2 1 15 px q c 

### 2 2 1 

(^1 2) 3 

- = 

### 

### ^ + + 

 ^ h ^ 

 h 

## y h , where^ c^ is a constant of integration, 

 and p and q are integers to be found. [6] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/12/F/M/16 **[Turn over** 

 (iii) Hence find x 2 x 1 d x 0 5. 

 1 21 

## y ^^ h.^ [2] 

 Question 11 is printed on the next page. 


© UCLES 2016 0606/12/F/M/16 

**11 (i)** Show that cosec cosec 

 tan 1 

### 1 

### 1 

### 1 2 2 

 i i 

 i 

- 

### 

### + 

### =. [4] 

 (ii) Hence solve cosec cosec 

 tan 1 

### 1 

### 1 

(^1 6) _i i i_ 

- 

### 

### + 

 = + for 0 c^1 i 1360 c. [4] 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 


