 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 14 printed pages and 2 blank pages. 

 IB17 11_0610_22/5RP © UCLES 2017 [Turn over 

# *3623538707* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## BIOLOGY 0610/22 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) October/November 2017 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2017 0610/22/O/N/17 

**1** To which group do **both** the organisms shown in the diagram belong? 

 leaf-like fronds which have structures containing spores on their lower surface 

 A dicotyledons 

 B ferns 

 C fungi 

 D monocotyledons 

**2** The diagram shows a section of DNA from a chimpanzee. 

## A G C T A C A G A G 

 Which diagram shows a section of DNA from the organism that is most closely related to the chimpanzee? 

## A A G C T A C A G A T 

## B A G C T A C A G T T 

## C A T C A A C A G T T 

## D A T C T A C A G T T 


© UCLES 2017 0610/22/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**3** What is a leaf? 

 A a cell 

 B an organ 

 C an organ system 

 D a tissue 

**4** The diagram shows a magnified image of a human liver cell with a mitochondrion labelled. The actual size of the liver cell is 20 μm. 

 The image size of the liver cell is 40 mm and the image size of the mitochondrion is 4 mm. 

 20 μm 

 mitochondrion 

 What is the actual size of the mitochondrion shown in the diagram? 

 A 0.002 mm B 0.02 mm C 0.2 mm D 2 mm 

**5** What would increase the rate of diffusion of oxygen into an animal cell? 

 A decreasing the concentration gradient between the inside of the cell and the outside 

 B decreasing the temperature of the cell and its surroundings 

 C increasing the distance that the oxygen molecules have to travel 

 D increasing the surface area of the cell membrane 


© UCLES 2017 0610/22/O/N/17 

**6** A red blood cell and a palisade mesophyll cell are placed in a solution which has a higher water potential than the cells. 

 What will happen to each cell? 

red blood cell (^) mesophyll cellpalisade **A** bursts bursts **B** bursts gains mass **C** loses mass gains mass **D** loses mass loses mass **7** Where in the alimentary canal is the enzyme trypsin found and what are the products of the reaction it catalyses? where trypsin is found products **A** duodenum amino acids **B** duodenum fatty acids **C** ileum proteins **D** stomach amino acids **8** The diagram shows a cell before and during mitosis. At which stage are the chromosomes copied? 

## D 

## B 

## A 

## C 


© UCLES 2017 0610/22/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**9** Why does excessive heat decrease enzyme activity? 

 A It changes the shape of the active site. 

 B It changes the shape of the substrate and product molecules. 

 C It increases the force of collisions between substrate and product molecules. 

 D It increases the kinetic energy of the substrate molecules. 

**10** Four test-tubes were set up as shown in the table. 

 In which test-tube would starch be broken down the fastest? 

 2 cm^3 starch suspension added 

 1 cm^3 of amylase added 

 1 cm^3 of boiled amylase added 

 temperature / °C 

 A    5 key 

 B    35 = present 

 C    5 = absent 

 D    35 

**11** The average number of chloroplasts in four different types of cell taken from a plant is shown. 

 Which is a root hair cell? 

 A 0 B 47 C 370 D 920 

**12** What must be increased in the diet of a person suffering from constipation? 

 A fats 

 B fibre 

 C iron 

 D protein 

**13** Which stage of nutrition takes place when food molecules become part of a body cell? 

 A absorption 

 B assimilation 

 C digestion 

 D ingestion 


© UCLES 2017 0610/22/O/N/17 

**14** The diagram shows the human alimentary canal, with a string marked in metres beside it. 

 oesophagus 

 anus 

## 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 

 string marked in metres 

 How long is the small intestine? 

 A 2 m B 6 m C 8 m D 9 m 

**15** What is the function of translocation? 

 A to move leaves towards the light for photosynthesis 

 B to move water into leaves for photosynthesis 

 C to transport amino acids for the growth of new leaves 

 D to transport starch to all parts of a plant 

**16** What is a description of transpiration? 

 A exchange of gases between the leaf and the atmosphere 

 B loss of water vapour from the leaves and stems of a plant 

 C movement of water from the roots to the leaves 

 D movement of water through the cells of the leaf 


© UCLES 2017 0610/22/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**17** What happens as the blood flows from the atria into the ventricles of the heart? 

 atrioventricular valves 

 muscle wall of the atria 

 muscle wall of the ventricles 

 semi-lunar valves 

 A close relax contract open 

 B close relax relax open 

 C open contract contract close 

 D open contract relax close 

**18** The diagram shows a cross-section through a human blood vessel. 

 elastic and fibrous connective tissue 

 muscle layer 

 Which type of blood vessel does the diagram show? 

 A an artery 

 B a capillary 

 C a vein 

 D a ventricle 

**19** Which is a mechanical barrier to pathogens? 

 A acid in the stomach 

 B hairs in the nose 

 C mucus in the trachea 

 D phagocytosis in the blood 


© UCLES 2017 0610/22/O/N/17 

**20** The table shows some of the changes that occur during breathing. 

 from contracted to relaxed 

 from relaxed to contracted 

 diaphragm P X 

 external intercostals Q Y 

 internal intercostals R Z 

 Which changes occur to cause inspiration? 

 A P, Q and Z B X, Q and R C X, Y and R D X, Y and Z 

**21** In an experiment to investigate anaerobic respiration, two bottles are set up in a warm room, as shown. 

 balloon 

## P Q 

 balloon 

 yeast and water 

 sugar, yeast and water 

 What would happen to each balloon after one day? 

## P Q 

## A 

## P Q 

## B 

## P Q 

## C 

## P Q 

## D 


© UCLES 2017 0610/22/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**22** Vigorous exercise can cause an oxygen debt. 

 Which process removes the oxygen debt? 

 A aerobic respiration of lactic acid in the liver 

 B a decrease in breathing rate 

 C a decrease in heart rate 

 D an increase in blood supply to the skin 

**23** What is the most important function of sweating? 

 A to remove excess heat from the body 

 B to remove excess salts from the body 

 C to remove excess urea from the body 

 D to remove excess water from the body 

**24** Which row shows the function of rod cells? 

 have greater sensitivity to light give colour vision 

 A   

 B   

 C   

 D   


© UCLES 2017 0610/22/O/N/17 

**25** The diagram shows a person sweating in hot weather. 

 What part is played by sweat glands during the process of sweating? 

 A effector 

 B receptor 

 C sense organ 

 D stimulus 

**26** The diagram shows a synapse in a reflex arc. 

 P Q 

 What are the identities of the two neurones and in which direction does the neurotransmitter pass? 

 neurone P neurone Q direction of passageof neurotransmitter 

 A motor relay P → Q 

 B motor sensory P → Q 

 C relay motor Q → P 

 D relay sensory Q → P 


© UCLES 2017 0610/22/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**27** The graph shows the number of deaths from MRSA infection per 100 000 people in a population of over-65-year-olds from 2005 to 2012. 

## 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 

 year 

## 2010 2011 2012 

## 13 

## 12 

## 11 

## 10 

## 9 

## 8 

 number of deaths from MRSA infection in over-65-year-olds per 100 000 people 

 What is a possible explanation for the changes shown in the graph? 

 A a decrease in the size of the population of over-65-year-olds 

 B antibiotics do not affect viruses 

 C more effective antibiotics are being used to treat infected people 

 D over-65-year-olds are immune to MRSA infection 

**28** After fertilisation, how many chromosomes are in the zygote? 

 A half as many as in an ovum 

 B the same as in an ovum 

 C the same as in a sperm 

 D twice as many as in a sperm 

**29** Which environmental factor is **not** always a requirement for seed germination? 

 A light 

 B oxygen 

 C suitable temperature 

 D water 


© UCLES 2017 0610/22/O/N/17 

**30** In some plants, H is the dominant allele for hairy stems and h is the recessive allele for smooth stems. 

 A pair of these plants produce 37 offspring, 18 with hairy stems and 19 with smooth stems. 

 What are the most likely genotypes of the parents? 

 A HH × HH B Hh × Hh C Hh × hh D hh × hh 

**31** The family tree shows the inheritance of the ability to smell flowers called freesias. The allele for the ability to smell freesias is dominant. 

 Which individual’s symbol is not correct? 

## A 

## D C B 

 female able to smell freesias female unable to smell freesias male able to smell freesias male unable to smell freesias 

 key 

**32** The diagram shows a cell from an organism at the end of meiosis. 

 What is the diploid number for cells from this organism? 

 A 3 B 6 C 12 D 24 

**33** When growing millet, farmers choose seeds from high-yielding plants. 

 Which biological practice is this an example of? 

 A adaptation 

 B artificial selection 

 C evolution 

 D natural selection 


© UCLES 2017 0610/22/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**34** Which graph shows the growth of a population where there are no limiting factors? 

## 0 

## 0 

 time 

 population size 

## A 

 time 

 population size 

## B 

 time 

 population size 

## C 

 time 

 population size 

## D 

## 0 

## 0 

## 0 

## 0 

## 0 

## 0 

**35** What is defined as ‘all of the populations of different species in an ecosystem’? 

 A community 

 B environment 

 C habitat 

 D trophic level 

**36** Which pyramid of numbers has more herbivores than producers? 

 A B C D 


© UCLES 2017 0610/22/O/N/17 

**37** Why are bacteria useful in biotechnology and genetic engineering? 

 A Bacteria do not have cell vacuoles. 

 B Bacteria do not have mitochondria. 

 C Bacteria have cell walls. 

 D Bacteria share their genetic code with all other organisms. 

**38** Ligase enzymes are used in genetic engineering to 

 A cut open plasmid DNA. 

 B insert plasmids into bacteria. 

 C isolate the DNA making up a human gene. 

 D join human DNA to plasmid DNA. 

**39** The action of which type of bacteria would cause soil to be lacking in nitrates? 

 A aerobic 

 B denitrifying 

 C nitrifying 

 D nitrogen fixing 

**40** What is used to help sustain fish stocks? 

 education legal quotas eating more fish restocking 

 A     

 B     

 C     

 D     


© UCLES 2017 0610/22/O/N/17 

## BLANK PAGE 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2017 0610/22/O/N/17 

## BLANK PAGE 


