 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 16 printed pages. IB17 11_0610_13/4RP© UCLES 2017 [Turn over 

# *7127785257 

# * 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## BIOLOGY 0610/13 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) October/November 2017 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer SheetSoft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid.Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you.DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. There areanswers A forty , B , C questions on this paper. Answerand D. all questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet.Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2017 0610/13/O/N/17 

**1** Which process releases water and energy? **A** aerobic respiration **B** osmosis **C** photosynthesis **D** protein synthesis 

**2** The dire wolf is an extinct species of wolf. What is the correct scientific name for this wolf? **A** _Canis Dirus_ **B** _canis dirus_ **C** _Canis dirus_ **D** _canis Dirus_ 

**3** Which of the animals shown is a crustacean? **A B C D** 

**4** The diagram shows a type of plant cell. 

 nucleus 

 cytoplasm 

 cell wall vacuole Where does this type of cell come from? A a root B cuticle C palisade mesophyll D spongy mesophyll 


© UCLES 2017 0610/13/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**5** Which structures are found in a white blood cell? 

 membranecell wallcell chloroplast^ vacuolelarge cytoplasm^ nucleus A       B       C       D       

**6** The diagram shows the structure of a plant cell. 

 This cell is part of a tissue which A absorbs carbon dioxide from the air. B absorbs ions from the soil. C transports sucrose from leaves. D transports water in stems. 

**7** A student made the following statements about the movement of ions by active transport. 1 It is the net movement of particles from a low concentration to a high concentration. 2 It is the net movement of particles from a high concentration to a low concentration. 3 It requires the use of energy. 4 It can only take place in living, respiring cells. Which statements are correct? **A** 1, 3 and 4 **B** 1 and 4 only **C** 2 and 4 **D** 2 only 


© UCLES 2017 0610/13/O/N/17 

**8** Which diagram shows the appearance of a plant cell after it is placed in pure water? 

## C D 

## A B 

**9** What is the colour change shown by Benedict’s solution when heated with a reducing sugar? **A** blue to purple **B** blue to red **C** brown to blue-black **D** red to yellow 

**10** Into which part of the alimentary canal is the enzyme that digests starch secreted? **A B C** 

## D 


© UCLES 2017 0610/13/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**11** Which of these is digested by protease? **A B C D** 

 key amino acid glucose chemical bond 

**12** What must be increased in the diet of a person suffering from constipation? **A** fats **B** fibre **C** iron **D** protein 

**13** The diagram shows the human alimentary canal, with a string marked in metres beside it. oesophagus 

 anus 

## 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 

 string marked in metres 

 How long is the small intestine? A 2 m B 6 m C 8 m D 9 m 


© UCLES 2017 0610/13/O/N/17 

**14** A person has swollen, bleeding gums and slow wound healing. This could be caused by a lack of which nutrient in a diet? **A** calcium **B** fibre **C** iron **D** vitamin C 

**15** Which function is performed by the duodenum? **A** assimilation **B** digestion **C** egestion **D** ingestion 

**16** Solid food enters the mouth at P and enters the oesophagus at Q. 

## P 

## Q 

 How does the food at Q differ from the food at P? A It contains less fibre. B It contains less vitamin D. C It contains less protein. D It contains less starch. 

**17** What is a description of transpiration? **A** exchange of gases between the leaf and the atmosphere **B** loss of water vapour from the leaves and stems of a plant **C** movement of water from the roots to the leaves **D** movement of water through the cells of the leaf 


© UCLES 2017 0610/13/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**18** Which words correctly complete the following two sentences? During transpiration, water moves from the ......1...... in a leaf and passes into ......2...... cells. It then leaves the surface of these cells by ......3...... and ......4...... out of the stomata. 1 2 3 4 **A** phloem xylem osmosis evaporates **B** stomata guard active transport flows **C** xylem mesophyll diffusion drains **D** xylem mesophyll evaporation diffuses 

**19** The diagram shows a cross-section through a human blood vessel. 

 elastic and fibrous connective tissue muscle layer 

 Which type of blood vessel does the diagram show? A an artery B a capillary C a vein D a ventricle 


© UCLES 2017 0610/13/O/N/17 

**20** The photomicrograph shows some blood cells. 

## P 

 What is the function of cell P? A It carries carbon dioxide. B It carries oxygen. C It helps to clot blood. D It produces antibodies. 

**21** What can be passed from one person to another during blood transfusion? **A** cholera **B** chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) **C** HIV **D** scurvy 


© UCLES 2017 0610/13/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**22** The diagram shows some structures in the human thorax (chest). From which part does most oxygen pass directly into the blood? 

 A 

 B 

## C 

## D 


© UCLES 2017 0610/13/O/N/17 

**23** In an experiment to investigate anaerobic respiration, two bottles are set up in a warm room, asshown. 

 balloon 

## P Q 

 balloon 

 yeast and water 

 sugar, yeast and water What would happen to each balloon after one day? 

## P Q 

## A 

## P Q 

## B 

## P Q 

## C 

## P Q 

## D 


© UCLES 2017 0610/13/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**24** The diagram represents the exchange of gases during breathing and during respiration in thebody. 

 carbon dioxide in blood 

 oxygen in blood 

 carbon dioxide 

 oxygen X Y 

 What is represented by X and by Y? X Y A lungs air B lungs body cells C body cells air D body cells lungs 

**25** What is the most important function of sweating? **A** to remove excess heat from the body **B** to remove excess salts from the body **C** to remove excess urea from the body **D** to remove excess water from the body 

**26** A student begins to lose control of her bicycle while travelling down a hill at speed. The concentration of which substance will begin to increase rapidly in her blood? **A** adrenaline **B** insulin **C** oestrogen **D** testosterone 

**27** What shows the order in which these structures are involved in a reflex action? **A** effector → motor neurone → relay neurone → sensory neurone → receptor **B** effector → sensory neurone → motor neurone → relay neurone→ receptor **C** receptor → sensory neurone → relay neurone → motor neurone → effector **D** receptor → motor neurone → sensory neurone → relay neurone→ effector 


© UCLES 2017 0610/13/O/N/17 

**28** The diagram shows a person sweating in hot weather. 

 What part is played by sweat glands during the process of sweating? A effector B receptor C sense organ D stimulus 

**29** Which row states the possible harmful effects of tobacco smoke? 

 cancer liver damage coronaryheart disease A    B    C    D    

**30** Which method of birth control works by preventing an egg from being released? **A** condom **B** contraceptive pill **C** monitoring body temperature **D** vasectomy 


© UCLES 2017 0610/13/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**31** Which environmental factor is **not** always a requirement for seed germination? **A** light **B** oxygen **C** suitable temperature **D** water 

**32** The diagram shows half a flower. 

 P Q R S 

 After pollination, where would pollen grains be found? A P and Q B Q and R C R and S D S and P 

**33** A pure-breeding white rat was crossed with a pure-breeding black rat. All their offspring wereblack. 

 One of the offspring was bred with a pure-breeding white rat. What is the most likely percentage of black rats in the offspring? A 25 B 50 C 75 D 100 

**34** A tall pea plant is crossed with a short pea plant. All the offspring plants are tall. What are the genotypes of the tall parent plant and the offspring? tall parent offspring **A** heterozygous heterozygous **B** heterozygous homozygous **C** homozygous heterozygous **D** homozygous homozygous 


© UCLES 2017 0610/13/O/N/17 

**35** What is a mutation? **A** a change in appearance **B** a change in a gene **C** a change in behaviour **D** a change in the environment 

**36** Which two processes both result in increased water vapour in the atmosphere? **A** condensation and precipitation **B** condensation and transpiration **C** evaporation and transpiration **D** precipitation and evaporation 

**37** The diagram shows a food web. 

 herbivores 

 decomposers 

 plants carnivores 

 What do the arrows represent? A the absorption of oxygen B the absorption of water C the flow of energy D the release of carbon dioxide 


© UCLES 2017 0610/13/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**38** The diagram shows part of a food web. 

 plants 

 worms slugs 

 frogs 

 snakes badgers 

 blackbirds hedgehogs 

 What is most likely to increase the size of the frog population? A fewer hedgehogs B fewer slugs C more badgers D more blackbirds 

**39** The diagram shows a bacterial cell that will be used to produce human insulin. 

## Q 

 bacterial DNA 

 bacterial cell 

 What is inserted into gap Q? A a gene from a healthy human B cells from a human pancreas C DNA from another bacterium D molecules of human insulin 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeInternational Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge LocalExaminations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2017 0610/13/O/N/17 

**40** The table shows the amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere in three different years. 

 year 1930 1980 1990 carbon dioxide / parts per million 300 330 370 What is the most likely cause of this change? A destruction of rainforests B increased use of fertilisers containing nitrogen C pollution of air by sulfur dioxide D rise in the sea level 


