 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. 

 IB17 11_0610_11/3RP © UCLES 2017 [Turn over 

# *0846476635 

# * 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## BIOLOGY 0610/11 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) October/November 2017 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2017 0610/11/O/N/17 

**1** Which process in plant cells uses chlorophyll? 

 A growth 

 B nutrition 

 C movement 

 D respiration 

**2** The table shows the scientific names of four members of the cat family. 

 common name scientific name 

 leopard Panthera pardus 

 lion Panthera leo 

 ocelot Leopardus pardalis 

 tiger Panthera tigris 

 Which statement is correct? 

 A All four cats are members of the same species. 

 B The leopard and the ocelot are members of the same genus. 

 C The leopard, lion and tiger are members of the same genus. 

 D The leopard, lion and tiger are members of the same species. 

**3** The diagram shows a type of tooth. 

 crown 

 root 

 Use the key to identify the tooth. 

 1 the root is divided into two parts ............................................................... go to 2 

 the root is not divided into two parts ......................................................... go to 3 

 2 the height of the crown is greater than the length of the root ................... A 

 the height of the crown is less than the length of the root ........................ B 

 3 flattened crown ......................................................................................... C 

 ridged crown ............................................................................................. D 


© UCLES 2017 0610/11/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**4** The diagram shows a student’s drawing of guard cells. 

 Which label is not correct? 

 A cell membrane 

 B cytoplasm 

 C vacuole 

 D cell wall 

**5** The diagrams show a leaf and its internal structure. 

## 1 

## 2 

## 3 

 What are the levels of organisation of the labelled structures? 

## 1 2 3 

 A cell tissue organ system 

 B organ cell tissue 

 C organ system tissue cell 

 D tissue cell organ 


© UCLES 2017 0610/11/O/N/17 

**6** The diagram shows an insect as seen using the low power lens of a microscope. 

 The actual diameter of the circle is 0.3 cm. 

 What is the approximate size of this insect in millimetres? 

 A 0.1 mm B 1.0 mm C 2.0 mm D 3.0 mm 

**7** The diagram shows part of a section through a leaf. 

 Which arrow represents the diffusion of oxygen during photosynthesis? 

 leaf cells xylem 

## C 

## D 

**B** (^) **A 8** What helps to support plants? **A** pressure inwards on the cell vacuoles **B** pressure inwards on the chloroplasts **C** pressure outwards on the cell walls **D** pressure outwards on the nuclei 


© UCLES 2017 0610/11/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**9** Which of these is digested by protease? 

 A 

 B 

 C 

 D 

 key amino acid glucose chemical bond 

**10** Which enzyme is used to produce clear apple juice? 

 A amylase 

 B lipase 

 C pectinase 

 D protease 

**11** What is the optimum pH for stomach enzymes? 

 A pH 2 B pH 7 C pH 9 D pH 12 

**12** What are the raw materials necessary for photosynthesis? 

 A carbon dioxide and water 

 B light and a suitable temperature 

 C oxygen and carbon dioxide 

 D water and a suitable temperature 

**13** In plants, which substance contains magnesium ions? 

 A cellulose 

 B chlorophyll 

 C haemoglobin 

 D starch 

**14** What must be increased in the diet of a person suffering from constipation? 

 A fats 

 B fibre 

 C iron 

 D protein 


© UCLES 2017 0610/11/O/N/17 

**15** Which chemical reaction takes place in the mouth? 

 A Fats are digested into fatty acids and glycerol. 

 B Fats are digested into simpler sugars. 

 C Starch is digested into simpler sugars. 

 D Starch is digested into amino acids. 

**16** The diagram shows the human alimentary canal, with a string marked in metres beside it. 

 oesophagus 

 anus 

## 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 

 string marked in metres 

 How long is the small intestine? 

 A 2 m B 6 m C 8 m D 9 m 

**17** What is a description of transpiration? 

 A exchange of gases between the leaf and the atmosphere 

 B loss of water vapour from the leaves and stems of a plant 

 C movement of water from the roots to the leaves 

 D movement of water through the cells of the leaf 


© UCLES 2017 0610/11/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**18** Which tissue transports water from the roots to the leaves in a plant? 

 A cortex 

 B epidermis 

 C mesophyll 

 D xylem 

**19** On which organ is an ECG performed? 

 A brain 

 B colon 

 C ear 

 D heart 

**20** The diagram shows a cross-section through a human blood vessel. 

 elastic and fibrous connective tissue 

 muscle layer 

 Which type of blood vessel does the diagram show? 

 A an artery 

 B a capillary 

 C a vein 

 D a ventricle 

**21** Which are both chemical barriers to the transmission of pathogens? 

 A mucus and stomach acid 

 B mucus and white blood cells 

 C skin and hairs in the nose 

 D skin and stomach acid 


© UCLES 2017 0610/11/O/N/17 

**22** The table shows the approximate composition of inspired and expired air. 

 gas percentage of gasin inspired air percentage of gasin expired air 

## P 78.10 78.10 

## Q 20.90 16.00 

 R variable variable 

 S 0.04 4.00 

 What is the name of gas S? 

 A carbon dioxide 

 B nitrogen 

 C oxygen 

 D water vapour 


© UCLES 2017 0610/11/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**23** In an experiment to investigate anaerobic respiration, two bottles are set up in a warm room, as shown. 

 balloon 

## P Q 

 balloon 

 yeast and water 

 sugar, yeast and water 

 What would happen to each balloon after one day? 

## P Q 

## A 

## P Q 

## B 

## P Q 

## C 

## P Q 

## D 


© UCLES 2017 0610/11/O/N/17 

**24** The diagram represents the exchange of gases during breathing and during respiration in the body. 

 carbon dioxide in blood 

 oxygen in blood 

 carbon dioxide 

 oxygen 

 X Y 

 What is represented by X and by Y? 

## X Y 

 A lungs air 

 B lungs body cells 

 C body cells air 

 D body cells lungs 

**25** The table shows information about urea. 

 Which row is correct? 

 substance that urea is made from 

 organ that makes urea 

 organ that excretes urea 

 A amino acids kidney bladder 

 B amino acids liver kidney 

 C fatty acids kidney bladder 

 D fatty acids liver kidney 

**26** What is the most important function of sweating? 

 A to remove excess heat from the body 

 B to remove excess salts from the body 

 C to remove excess urea from the body 

 D to remove excess water from the body 


© UCLES 2017 0610/11/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**27** What shows the order in which these structures are involved in a reflex action? 

 A effector → motor neurone → relay neurone → sensory neurone → receptor 

 B effector → sensory neurone → motor neurone → relay neurone→ receptor 

 C receptor → sensory neurone → relay neurone → motor neurone → effector 

 D receptor → motor neurone → sensory neurone → relay neurone→ effector 

**28** The diagram shows a person sweating in hot weather. 

 What part is played by sweat glands during the process of sweating? 

 A effector 

 B receptor 

 C sense organ 

 D stimulus 

**29** The diagram shows the gas exchange surface of a person who has just smoked a cigarette. 

 Substance P can cause cancer. 

 P moisture alveolus wall 

 What is substance P? 

 A carbon dioxide 

 B carbon monoxide 

 C nicotine 

 D tar 


© UCLES 2017 0610/11/O/N/17 

**30** Which method of birth control works by preventing an egg from being released? 

 A condom 

 B contraceptive pill 

 C monitoring body temperature 

 D vasectomy 

**31** Which environmental factor is **not** always a requirement for seed germination? 

 A light 

 B oxygen 

 C suitable temperature 

 D water 

**32** Four processes involved in labour and birth are shown. 

 1 cutting the umbilical cord 

 2 contraction of muscles in the uterus wall 

 3 dilation of the cervix 

 4 passage of the baby through the vagina 

 In which sequence do these events normally occur? 

 A 2 → 3 → 1 → 4 

 B 2 → 3 → 4 → 1 

 C 3 → 2 → 1 → 4 

 D 3 → 2 → 4 → 1 

**33** In some mammals the allele for brown coat colour is dominant to the allele for white coat colour. 

 Which percentage of offspring will be white if a cross is made between two heterozygous mammals? 

 A 0% B 25% C 50% D 100% 


© UCLES 2017 0610/11/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**34** Which term is defined as a length of DNA that codes for a protein? 

 A amino acid 

 B chromosome 

 C gene 

 D mutation 

**35** What makes tongue rolling an example of discontinuous variation? 

 A A person can roll their tongue only when they are young. 

 B There are many different types of tongue rollers. 

 C Tongue rolling has to be learnt. 

 D Tongue rolling is something that a person either can or cannot do. 

**36** What is shown by the widest block in a pyramid of numbers for a grassland ecosystem? 

 A all the consumers in the pyramid 

 B the carnivores in the pyramid 

 C the organisms at the top of the pyramid 

 D the producers in the pyramid 

**37** A food chain is shown. 

 potato plant → slug → hedgehog 

 By which process is energy transferred from the potato plant to the slug? 

 A egestion 

 B excretion 

 C ingestion 

 D photosynthesis 


© UCLES 2017 0610/11/O/N/17 

**38** A farmer put some fertiliser on his field. Some of the fertiliser drained into a nearby lake. 

 land with fertiliser 

 lake plants 

 What is the effect of the fertiliser on the growth of the crop plants in the field and the plants in the lake? 

 crop plant growth 

 lake plant growth 

 A decreased decreased 

 B decreased increased 

 C increased decreased 

 D increased increased 

**39** The diagrams show the depth and rate of breathing in a person at 12.00 pm and 1.00 pm. 

 volume 

## 0 10 20 30 

 time / seconds 

## 40 50 60 70 

 volume 

## 0 10 20 30 

 time / seconds 

 12.00 pm 1.00 pm 

## 40 50 60 70 

 0.5 dm^3 

 What happens to the person’s breathing between 12.00 pm and 1.00 pm? 

 depth of breathing 

 rate of breathing 

 A decreases decreases 

 B decreases increases 

 C increases decreases 

 D increases increases 


© UCLES 2017 0610/11/O/N/17 

**40** The table shows the amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere in three different years. 

 year 1930 1980 1990 

 carbon dioxide / parts per million 300 330 370 

 What is the most likely cause of this change? 

 A destruction of rainforests 

 B increased use of fertilisers containing nitrogen 

 C pollution of air by sulfur dioxide 

 D rise in the sea level 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2017 0610/11/O/N/17 

## BLANK PAGE 


