 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 17 printed pages and 3 blank pages. 

 IB17 11_0610_23/3RP © UCLES 2017 [Turn over 

# *0288685329 

# * 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## BIOLOGY 0610/23 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) October/November 2017 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2017 0610/23/O/N/17 

**1** The plant _Mimosa pudica_ has leaves that fold in when touched. 

 This demonstrates movement and which other characteristic? 

 A excretion 

 B growth 

 C nutrition 

 D sensitivity 

**2** The diagram shows a section of DNA from a chimpanzee. 

## A G C T A C A G A G 

 Which diagram shows a section of DNA from the organism that is most closely related to the chimpanzee? 

## A A G C T A C A G A T 

## B A G C T A C A G T T 

## C A T C A A C A G T T 

## D A T C T A C A G T T 


© UCLES 2017 0610/23/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**3** The diagrams show structures associated with a leaf. 

 thick cellulose wall 

 nucleus 

 vacuole 

 cytoplasm leaf leaf stalk detail 

 What is the level of organisation of the part shown in detail? 

 A cell 

 B organ 

 C organ system 

 D tissue 

**4** The diagram shows a pollen grain of a rice plant. The size of the image is 40 mm 

 40 μm 

 The actual length of the pollen grain is 40 μm. 

 By how many times has the diagram been magnified? 

 A × 1 B × 10 C × 100 D × 1000 


© UCLES 2017 0610/23/O/N/17 

**5** Three equally sized pieces of potato were put into different concentrations of sucrose solution. One piece of potato was put into distilled water. 

 The concentrations of sucrose solution were 0.2 g dm–3, 0.4 g dm–3^ and 0.6 g dm–3. 

 The graph shows the change in mass of the potato pieces over a period of 60 minutes. 

 Which piece of potato was put into distilled water? 

 2 

 1 

 0 

 –1 

 0 time^ /^ minutes 60 

 change in mass of the potato pieces / g 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 

**6** A red blood cell and a palisade mesophyll cell are placed in a solution which has a higher water potential than the cells. 

 What will happen to each cell? 

red blood cell (^) mesophyll cellpalisade **A** bursts bursts **B** bursts gains mass **C** loses mass gains mass **D** loses mass loses mass 


© UCLES 2017 0610/23/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**7** The diagram shows an evolutionary tree based on a computer-generated study of different sea mammals. 

 fin whale 

 humpback whale 

 sperm whale 

 beaked whale 

 dolphin 

 porpoise 

 common ancestor 

 According to this evolutionary tree, which whale has DNA base sequences that are least shared with the other whales? 

 A beaked whale 

 B fin whale 

 C humpback whale 

 D sperm whale 

**8** What is the colour change shown by Benedict’s solution when heated with a reducing sugar? 

 A blue to purple 

 B blue to red 

 C brown to blue-black 

 D red to yellow 


© UCLES 2017 0610/23/O/N/17 

**9** Into which part of the alimentary canal is the enzyme that digests starch secreted? 

 A 

## B 

## C 

## D 

**10** The diagram shows an enzyme with its substrate and product molecules. 

## Q 

## R 

## S 

## P 

 Which form an enzyme-substrate complex? 

 A P and Q B Q and R C R and S D S and P 


© UCLES 2017 0610/23/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**11** The diagram shows the apparatus at the beginning of an investigation into temperature change during the germination of seeds. The temperature at the start of the investigation was 25 °C in both flasks. 

 After two days the temperature in flask 1 is 25 °C. The temperature in flask 2 is 28 °C. 

 dead and^ living seeds disinfected seeds 

 cotton wool 

 thermometer 

 flask 1 flask 2 

 vacuum flask 

 Which characteristic of living organisms is shown in this experiment? 

 A excretion 

 B growth 

 C reproduction 

 D respiration 

**12** What must be increased in the diet of a person suffering from constipation? 

 A fats 

 B fibre 

 C iron 

 D protein 


© UCLES 2017 0610/23/O/N/17 

**13** Which substrate, enzyme and product are correctly named? 

 substrate enzyme product 

 A amino acids trypsin protein 

 B amylase maltose glucose 

 C lipase lipid fatty acids and glycerol 

 D maltose maltase glucose 

**14** The diagram shows the human alimentary canal, with a string marked in metres beside it. 

 oesophagus 

 anus 

## 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 

 string marked in metres 

 How long is the small intestine? 

 A 2 m B 6 m C 8 m D 9 m 


© UCLES 2017 0610/23/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**15** What is **not** a use of water by plants? 

 A acting as a solvent 

 B cooling the plant 

 C dissolving cellulose cell walls 

 D raw material in photosynthesis 

**16** What is a description of transpiration? 

 A exchange of gases between the leaf and the atmosphere 

 B loss of water vapour from the leaves and stems of a plant 

 C movement of water from the roots to the leaves 

 D movement of water through the cells of the leaf 

**17** The diagram represents the circulatory system of a mammal. 

 In which chamber of the heart are the muscle walls thickest? 

## A B 

## D C 

 rest of lungs body 

 heart 


© UCLES 2017 0610/23/O/N/17 

**18** The diagram shows a cross-section through a human blood vessel. 

 elastic and fibrous connective tissue 

 muscle layer 

 Which type of blood vessel does the diagram show? 

 A an artery 

 B a capillary 

 C a vein 

 D a ventricle 

**19** What can be passed from one person to another during blood transfusion? 

 A cholera 

 B chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) 

 C HIV 

 D scurvy 

**20** The table shows some of the changes that occur during breathing. 

 from contracted to relaxed 

 from relaxed to contracted 

 diaphragm P X 

 external intercostals Q Y 

 internal intercostals R Z 

 Which changes occur to cause inspiration? 

 A P, Q and Z B X, Q and R C X, Y and R D X, Y and Z 


© UCLES 2017 0610/23/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**21** In an experiment to investigate anaerobic respiration, two bottles are set up in a warm room, as shown. 

 balloon 

## P Q 

 balloon 

 yeast and water 

 sugar, yeast and water 

 What would happen to each balloon after one day? 

## P Q 

## A 

## P Q 

## B 

## P Q 

## C 

## P Q 

## D 


© UCLES 2017 0610/23/O/N/17 

**22** Two pieces of an aquatic plant were placed into two different test-tubes, P and Q. 

 Each test-tube contained hydrogencarbonate indicator and was sealed and kept at 20 °C. 

 Test-tube P was kept in the light and test-tube Q was kept in the dark. 

 The table shows the effect of carbon dioxide on the colour of the hydrogencarbonate indicator. 

 less carbon dioxide 

 more carbon dioxide 

 dark red orange 

 What would the colour of the indicator be after 12 hours? 

## P Q 

 A dark red orange 

 B dark red dark red 

 C orange dark red 

 D orange orange 

**23** What is the most important function of sweating? 

 A to remove excess heat from the body 

 B to remove excess salts from the body 

 C to remove excess urea from the body 

 D to remove excess water from the body 

**24** A student begins to lose control of her bicycle while travelling down a hill at speed. 

 The concentration of which substance will begin to increase rapidly in her blood? 

 A adrenaline 

 B insulin 

 C oestrogen 

 D testosterone 


© UCLES 2017 0610/23/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**25** The diagram shows a person sweating in hot weather. 

 What part is played by sweat glands during the process of sweating? 

 A effector 

 B receptor 

 C sense organ 

 D stimulus 

**26** The diagram shows a synapse in a reflex arc. 

 P Q 

 What are the identities of the two neurones and in which direction does the neurotransmitter pass? 

 neurone P neurone Q direction of passageof neurotransmitter 

 A motor relay P → Q 

 B motor sensory P → Q 

 C relay motor Q → P 

 D relay sensory Q → P 

**27** Which process occurring at a synapse is prevented by the presence of heroin? 

 A the binding of a neurotransmitter with receptors 

 B the diffusion of a neurotransmitter across the gap 

 C the formation of a neurotransmitter 

 D the stimulation of vesicles by an impulse 


© UCLES 2017 0610/23/O/N/17 

**28** The diagram shows half a flower. 

## P 

## Q 

## R 

## S 

 After pollination, where would pollen grains be found? 

 A P and Q B Q and R C R and S D S and P 

**29** Which environmental factor is **not** always a requirement for seed germination? 

 A light 

 B oxygen 

 C suitable temperature 

 D water 

**30** A pure-breeding white rat was crossed with a pure-breeding black rat. All their offspring were black. 

 One of the offspring was bred with a pure-breeding white rat. 

 What is the most likely percentage of black rats in the offspring? 

 A 25 B 50 C 75 D 100 

**31** An organism is heterozygous for a gene with the alleles T and t. 

 Which diagram represents a diploid cell from this organism? 

 A B C D 

 T t T T t T 


© UCLES 2017 0610/23/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**32** Red-green colour blindness is a sex-linked characteristic caused by a recessive allele. 

 Which prediction can be made about the children of a woman who is colour-blind and a man with normal vision? 

 A Boys will be colour-blind, girls will have a 50% chance of being colour-blind. 

 B Boys will be colour-blind, girls will have normal vision. 

 C Girls will be colour-blind, boys will have a 50% chance of being colour-blind. 

 D Girls will be colour-blind, boys will have normal vision. 

**33** The diagram shows a vertical section through a leaf. 

 upper epidermis 

 lower epidermis 

 sub-stomatal air chamber 

 spongy mesophyll cell 

 Which diagram shows the plant that the leaf was taken from? 

 A B C D 

 water 

**34** What is a mutation? 

 A a change in appearance 

 B a change in a gene 

 C a change in behaviour 

 D a change in the environment 


© UCLES 2017 0610/23/O/N/17 

**35** The biomass at each trophic level in an ecosystem is measured. The results are shown in the table. 

 Which trophic level contains herbivores? 

 trophic level mass^ /^ g^ m 

 –3 

## A 0.1 

## B 0.6 

## C 1.2 

## D 17.9 

**36** The diagram shows a food web. 

 herbivores 

 decomposers 

 plants carnivores 

 What do the arrows represent? 

 A the absorption of oxygen 

 B the absorption of water 

 C the flow of energy 

 D the release of carbon dioxide 

**37** Ligase enzymes are used in genetic engineering to 

 A cut open plasmid DNA. 

 B insert plasmids into bacteria. 

 C isolate the DNA making up a human gene. 

 D join human DNA to plasmid DNA. 

**38** With which kingdoms do bacteria share the same genetic code? 

 A animal, plant, fungus and protoctist 

 B animal, plant and fungus only 

 C animal and plant only 

 D animal only 


© UCLES 2017 0610/23/O/N/17 

**39** What is a direct result of deforestation? 

 A decreased leaching of mineral salts 

 B increased loss of soil 

 C increased production of methane 

 D increased recycling of important minerals 

**40** The table shows the ability of three species of fish and their eggs to survive in water at different pH levels. 

 If the eggs do not survive offspring cannot be produced. 

 pH 

 6.5 6.0 5.5 5.0 4.5 4.0 

 trout       key 

 sea bass       = survive 

 perch       = do not survive 

 fish eggs       

 A lake at pH 6.0 contains breeding populations of all three fish. 

 If acid rain causes the pH to fall to 5.0, which outcome would be likely to occur? 

 A Trout and perch will survive and produce offspring. 

 B Trout and perch will survive but only perch will produce offspring. 

 C Trout and perch will survive but produce no offspring. 

 D Trout, sea bass and perch will survive but produce no offspring. 


© UCLES 2017 0610/23/O/N/17 

## BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2017 0610/23/O/N/17 

## BLANK PAGE 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2017 0610/23/O/N/17 

## BLANK PAGE 


