* 0 4 1 6 2 5 9 0 5 6 * 

 This document consists of 9 printed pages and 3 blank pages. DC (ST/SG) 133516/4© UCLES 2017 [Turn over 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## BIOLOGY 0610/51 

 Paper 5 Practical Test October/November 2017 1 hour 15 minutes Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: As listed in the Confidential Instructions. READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in.Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs.Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. Answer all questions. Electronic calculators may be used.You may lose marks if you do not show your working or if you do not use appropriate units. At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together.The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. 

 This syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 For Examiner’s Use 1 2 Total 


**1** Fruits such as apples and bananas contain chemicals called polyphenols. An enzyme, polyphenoloxidase, is also present. It catalyses a reaction which converts the polyphenols into brown‑coloured compounds. This reaction happens when the cells are damaged and exposed to oxygen in the air. polyphenols + oxygen polyphenol oxidase brown‑coloured compounds You are going to investigate the effect of pH on the enzyme polyphenol oxidase in apples. **Read all the instructions but DO NOT CARRY THEM OUT until you have drawn a table for your results in the space provided in 1(a)(i).** You should use the gloves and eye protection provided when you are carrying out the practical work. Step 1 Label five Petri dishes **A** , **B** , **C** , **D** and **E**. Step 2 Pour the water from the container labelled **water** into Petri dish **A**. Step 3 Pour the solution labelled **B** into the Petri dish labelled **B**. Step 4 Repeat step 3 for each of the solutions labelled **C** , **D** and **E** and the Petri dishes labelled **C** , **D** and **E**. Step 5 Dip the end of one piece of Universal Indicator paper into the solution in Petri dish **A**. Compare the colour of the indicator paper to the colour chart provided to identify the pHof the solution. Record the pH in your table in **1(a)(i)**. Step 6 Repeat step 5 for Petri dishes **B** , **C** , **D** and **E**. Step 7 Cut the apple provided in half vertically and remove the peel. Put the peel into the container labelledand away from your hands. **waste**. When cutting, take care to cut downwards on to the white tile Step 8 Cut five slices from the apple, avoiding the core. Each apple slice should be approximately30 mm × 10 mm × 5 mm in size. Keep the rest of the apple for step 11. Step 9 On the white tile, chop one of the apple slices into small pieces and then use a spatula tocrush the pieces to a pulp. Chop and crush the four remaining apple slices. Keep each of the crushed apple slicesseparate from each other on the white tile, as shown in Fig. 1.1. 

 crushed apple slices 

 white tile 

 Fig. 1.1 Step 10 Place one of the crushed apple slices into each of the solutions in Petri dishes A , B , C , D and E. Put the lids on the Petri dishes and leave them for two minutes. Step 11 If the cut surface of the rest of the apple has started to turn brown, cut the brown layer away. Cut another 30 mm × 10 mm × 5 mm slice. Chop and crush this apple slice in thesame way as in step 9. Leave this crushed apple slice on the white tile and label it control. Put any leftover apple into the container labelled waste. 


© UCLES 2017 0610/51/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

 Step 12 Remove the lid of Petri dish A and carefully tilt the base so the liquid runs away from the crushed apple. Pour the liquid into the beaker labelled waste liquid. Make sure that the crushed apple does not fall into the waste liquid. Do not replace the lid of the Petri dish. Step 13 Repeat step 12 for each of the Petri dishes labelled B , C , D and E. Step 14 Determine the colour intensity of the crushed apple in each Petri dish using the key shown in Table 1.1. Record the results in your table in 1(a)(i). Step 15 Determine the colour intensity of the crushed apple in each Petri dish after 10 minutes and after 20 minutes. Record the results in your table in 1(a)(i). While you are waiting continue with the other questions. Table 1.1 colour of crushed apple slice no brown colour light brown dark brown colour intensity value 1 2 3 (a) (i) Prepare a table to record your results. Your table should include: 

- the colour intensity value for the crushed apple slices 

- the pH of each solution. 

## [6] 

 (ii) List the pH values from the most effective to the least effective in preventing the browning of the apple slices. .......................................................................................................................................[1] 


**(iii)** State the purpose of the control set up in step 11. ........................................................................................................................................... ........................................................................................................................................... .......................................................................................................................................[1] Table 1.2 shows the pH of some household products. **Table 1.2** household product olive oil lemon juice milk water salt water baking soda pH no value 2.0 6.6 7.0 7.6 9.0 **(iv)** Using the results of your investigation, suggest which of the household products in Table 1.2 could be used to treat cut apples to prevent them from going brown. Explain your choice. household product ............................................................................................................. explanation ........................................................................................................................ ........................................................................................................................................... [2] **(b) (i)** State **one** variable that has been kept constant in the investigation you have carried out. Describe how this variable has been kept constant. variable .............................................................................................................................. how it has been kept constant ........................................................................................... ........................................................................................................................................... [2] **(ii)** Explain why the lids were not put back on to the Petri dishes after the solutions were poured away in steps 12 and 13. ........................................................................................................................................... ........................................................................................................................................... .......................................................................................................................................[1] **(c)** Explain why the method used to find the colour intensity value for the crushed apple slices in step 14 is a source of error. ................................................................................................................................................... ................................................................................................................................................... ...............................................................................................................................................[1] 


© UCLES 2017 0610/51/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

 (d) Identify one source of error in steps 8, 9 or 10 and suggest an improvement for this error. source of error .......................................................................................................................... ................................................................................................................................................... improvement ............................................................................................................................. ................................................................................................................................................... ................................................................................................................................................... [2] (e) The enzyme polyphenol oxidase and the substrate polyphenol can be extracted from crushed apples. The substrate turns brown when the enzyme is present. Some students were provided with extracts of the enzyme and the substrate. Describe a method the students could use to find the optimum temperature of the enzyme. ................................................................................................................................................... ................................................................................................................................................... ................................................................................................................................................... ................................................................................................................................................... ................................................................................................................................................... ................................................................................................................................................... ................................................................................................................................................... ................................................................................................................................................... ................................................................................................................................................... ................................................................................................................................................... ................................................................................................................................................... ................................................................................................................................................... ...............................................................................................................................................[6] 


**(f)** In another experiment, enzymes were extracted from two different fruits. These enzyme extracts were heated at 65 °C for a total of 60 minutes. During this time samples were removed every 15 minutes. The samples were tested to find out how much enzyme activity remained. Table 1.3 shows the results of the experiment. **Table 1.3** sample time / min 

 percentage of enzyme activity remaining apricot avocado 0 100 100 15 5 40 30 0 25 45 0 20 60 0 10 


© UCLES 2017 0610/51/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

 (i) Plot a line graph on the grid of enzyme activity against sample time. You should plot the data for the apricot and for the avocado. 

## [5] 

 (ii) State a conclusion for these results. ........................................................................................................................................... ........................................................................................................................................... .......................................................................................................................................[1] [Total: 28] 


**2** Fig. 2.1 is a photomicrograph of some blood cells. 

 phagocytes nuclei 

 lymphocyte 

 red blood cells 

 magnification ×1500 Fig. 2.1 (a) (i) State two visible differences between the red blood cells and the white blood cells (phagocytes and lymphocytes) in Fig. 2.1. 1 ........................................................................................................................................ ........................................................................................................................................... 2 ........................................................................................................................................ ........................................................................................................................................... [2] (ii) Make a large drawing of the two cells labelled phagocytes in Fig. 2.1. 

## [4] 


**(b) (i)** Measure the diameters of the three marked blood cells, along both the lines drawn on each of the cells, in Fig. 2.1. Record these measurements in Table 2.1. Add the missing units to Table 2.1. Calculate the average diameter for each type of blood cell and write your results in Table 2.1. **Table 2.1** 

 type of blood cell diameter 1 /............... 

 diameter 2 /............... 

 average diameter /............... red blood cell lymphocyte phagocyte [3] (ii) Calculate the actual average diameter of the red blood cell using your answer in 2(b)(i) and the following equation. magnification = average diameter of the red blood cell in Fig. 2.1actual average diameter of the red blood cell Give your answer in micrometres (μm) to the nearest whole number. 1 mm = 1000 μm Show your working. 

 ...........................................................μm [3] [Total: 12] 


## BLANK PAGE 


## BLANK PAGE 


Permission to reproduce items where third‑party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer‑related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge InternationalExaminations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge LocalExaminations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

## BLANK PAGE 


