 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 14 printed pages and 2 blank pages. 

 IB17 11_0610_12/3RP © UCLES 2017 [Turn over 

# *9230046908 

# * 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## BIOLOGY 0610/12 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) October/November 2017 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2017 0610/12/O/N/17 

**1** Which process do living organisms use to remove excess carbon dioxide from their bodies? 

 A excretion 

 B movement 

 C nutrition 

 D respiration 

**2** When a donkey is bred with a zebra, a zebronkey is produced. Zebronkeys are not fertile animals. 

 Which statement is correct? 

 A Donkeys and zebras belong to different species because their offspring are not fertile. 

 B Donkeys and zebras belong to different species because they do not look exactly the same. 

 C Donkeys and zebras belong to the same species because they look alike. 

 D Donkeys and zebras belong to the same species because they produce offspring. 

**3** The diagram shows a leaf. 

 Use the key to identify the leaf. 

 1 leaf with several small leaflets .................................. go to 2 

 leaf with one large leaf blade .................................... go to 3 

 2 leaflets are broad and flat ......................................... A 

 leaflets are narrow and hair-like ............................... B 

 3 leaf with a smooth edge ........................................... C 

 leaf with a toothed edge ........................................... D 


© UCLES 2017 0610/12/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**4** The diagram shows a cell from the leaf of a plant. 

 Which part contains the highest amount of magnesium? 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 

**5** What is a leaf? 

 A a cell 

 B an organ 

 C an organ system 

 D a tissue 

**6** An experiment is set up as shown. 

 water 

 soluble blue crystals 

 After several hours, the water turns blue. 

 Which process causes this colour change to take place? 

 A absorption 

 B active transport 

 C diffusion 

 D osmosis 


© UCLES 2017 0610/12/O/N/17 

**7** A cell has an actual length of 0.2 mm. A student wants to make a drawing of this cell so that it appears two hundred times bigger. 

 How long should the student draw this cell? 

 A 4 mm B 0.04 cm C 40 mm D 40 cm 

**8** What are features of osmosis? 

 diffusion is involved requires cell walls 

 requires a partially permeable membrane 

 A    

 B    

 C    

 D    

**9** Which of these is digested by protease? 

 A 

 B 

 C 

 D 

 key amino acid glucose chemical bond 

**10** Which chemical is used to test for the presence of protein in a food sample? 

 A Benedict’s solution 

 B biuret solution 

 C DCPIP 

 D iodine solution 


© UCLES 2017 0610/12/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**11** Four test-tubes were set up as shown in the table. 

 In which test-tube would starch be broken down the fastest? 

 2 cm^3 starch suspension added 

 1 cm^3 of amylase added 

 1 cm^3 of boiled amylase added 

 temperature / °C 

 A    5 key 

 B    35 = present 

 C    5 = absent 

 D    35 

**12** The average number of chloroplasts in four different types of cell taken from a plant is shown. 

 Which is a root hair cell? 

 A 0 B 47 C 370 D 920 

**13** What must be increased in the diet of a person suffering from constipation? 

 A fats 

 B fibre 

 C iron 

 D protein 


© UCLES 2017 0610/12/O/N/17 

**14** The diagram shows the human alimentary canal, with a string marked in metres beside it. 

 oesophagus 

 anus 

## 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 

 string marked in metres 

 How long is the small intestine? 

 A 2 m B 6 m C 8 m D 9 m 

**15** What could lead to obesity? 

 A energy consumption exceeding energy expenditure 

 B increased consumption of dietary fibre 

 C reduced consumption of fat 

 D reduced consumption of sugar 

**16** Which stage of nutrition takes place when food molecules become part of a body cell? 

 A absorption 

 B assimilation 

 C digestion 

 D ingestion 


© UCLES 2017 0610/12/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**17** The diagram shows a transverse section through a plant organ. 

## M 

 What is M? 

 A phloem in a root 

 B phloem in a stem 

 C xylem in a root 

 D xylem in a stem 

**18** What is a description of transpiration? 

 A exchange of gases between the leaf and the atmosphere 

 B loss of water vapour from the leaves and stems of a plant 

 C movement of water from the roots to the leaves 

 D movement of water through the cells of the leaf 

**19** The diagram shows a cross-section through a human blood vessel. 

 elastic and fibrous connective tissue 

 muscle layer 

 Which type of blood vessel does the diagram show? 

 A an artery 

 B a capillary 

 C a vein 

 D a ventricle 


© UCLES 2017 0610/12/O/N/17 

**20** The diagram shows a section through a mammalian heart. 

 Which part carries blood directly from the lungs? 

 B C 

## A D 

**21** Which is a mechanical barrier to pathogens? 

 A acid in the stomach 

 B hairs in the nose 

 C mucus in the trachea 

 D phagocytosis in the blood 

**22** What is the approximate percentage of oxygen in exhaled air? 

 A 0.04 B 4.00 C 16.00 D 21.00 


© UCLES 2017 0610/12/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**23** In an experiment to investigate anaerobic respiration, two bottles are set up in a warm room, as shown. 

 balloon 

## P Q 

 balloon 

 yeast and water 

 sugar, yeast and water 

 What would happen to each balloon after one day? 

## P Q 

## A 

## P Q 

## B 

## P Q 

## C 

## P Q 

## D 


© UCLES 2017 0610/12/O/N/17 

**24** The diagram represents the exchange of gases during breathing and during respiration in the body. 

 carbon dioxide in blood 

 oxygen in blood 

 carbon dioxide 

 oxygen 

 X Y 

 What is represented by X and by Y? 

## X Y 

 A lungs air 

 B lungs body cells 

 C body cells air 

 D body cells lungs 

**25** What is the most important function of sweating? 

 A to remove excess heat from the body 

 B to remove excess salts from the body 

 C to remove excess urea from the body 

 D to remove excess water from the body 

**26** What shows the order in which these structures are involved in a reflex action? 

 A effector → motor neurone → relay neurone → sensory neurone → receptor 

 B effector → sensory neurone → motor neurone → relay neurone→ receptor 

 C receptor → sensory neurone → relay neurone → motor neurone → effector 

 D receptor → motor neurone → sensory neurone → relay neurone→ effector 

**27** Which acts as a sense organ? 

 A the gall bladder 

 B the kidney 

 C the skin 

 D the ureter 


© UCLES 2017 0610/12/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**28** The diagram shows a person sweating in hot weather. 

 What part is played by sweat glands during the process of sweating? 

 A effector 

 B receptor 

 C sense organ 

 D stimulus 

**29** Which disease is caused by bacteria? 

 A AIDS 

 B cholera 

 C obesity 

 D scurvy 

**30** Where does fertilisation occur in a flowering plant? 

 A in the ovary 

 B in the pollen grain 

 C in the style 

 D on the stigma 

**31** Which method of birth control works by preventing an egg from being released? 

 A condom 

 B contraceptive pill 

 C monitoring body temperature 

 D vasectomy 


© UCLES 2017 0610/12/O/N/17 

**32** Which environmental factor is **not** always a requirement for seed germination? 

 A light 

 B oxygen 

 C suitable temperature 

 D water 

**33** In some plants, H is the dominant allele for hairy stems and h is the recessive allele for smooth stems. 

 A pair of these plants produce 37 offspring, 18 with hairy stems and 19 with smooth stems. 

 What are the most likely genotypes of the parents? 

 A HH × HH B Hh × Hh C Hh × hh D hh × hh 

**34** The family tree shows the inheritance of the ability to smell flowers called freesias. The allele for the ability to smell freesias is dominant. 

 Which individual’s symbol is not correct? 

## A 

## D C B 

 female able to smell freesias female unable to smell freesias male able to smell freesias male unable to smell freesias 

 key 

**35** What is an example of continuous variation? 

 A blood group 

 B gender 

 C height 

 D tongue rolling 


© UCLES 2017 0610/12/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**36** Which pyramid of numbers has more herbivores than producers? 

 A B C D 

**37** The diagram shows the flow of energy along a food chain. 

 green plant rabbit fox 

 Which process in the rabbit will allow energy to be passed on to the fox? 

 A excretion 

 B growth 

 C movement 

 D sensitivity 

**38** The diagram shows part of the carbon cycle. 

 carbon dioxide in atmosphere 

 organic compounds in animals 

 organic compounds in plants 

 plant and animal remains in soil (humus) 

## 1 

## 2 

## 4 

## 3 

 Which two numbered arrows represent the process of respiration? 

 A 1 and 2 B 1 and 3 C 2 and 4 D 3 and 4 


© UCLES 2017 0610/12/O/N/17 

**39** When making commercial apple juice, the fruit is crushed to separate cells and to release the cell contents. Chemical Q is found between the cells. It holds the cells together but it makes the extracted juice cloudy. 

 Which process is used to produce a clear juice? 

 A adding more water to dissolve chemical Q 

 B adding pectinase to digest chemical Q 

 C boiling the juice to destroy chemical Q 

 D crushing the apples to release chemical Q 

**40** The table shows the amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere in three different years. 

 year 1930 1980 1990 

 carbon dioxide / parts per million 300 330 370 

 What is the most likely cause of this change? 

 A destruction of rainforests 

 B increased use of fertilisers containing nitrogen 

 C pollution of air by sulfur dioxide 

 D rise in the sea level 


© UCLES 2017 0610/12/O/N/17 

## BLANK PAGE 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2017 0610/12/O/N/17 

## BLANK PAGE 


