 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 19 printed pages and 1 blank page. 

 IB17 11_0625_12/4RP © UCLES 2017 [Turn over 

## *0285820688* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

### PHYSICS 0625/12 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) October/November 2017 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. Take the weight of 1.0 kg to be 10 N (acceleration of free fall = 10 m / s 2 ). 


© UCLES 2017 0625/12/O/N/17 

**1** A student investigates the rate of flow of oil through a funnel. 

 The diagrams show the experiment and the volume of oil in the measuring cylinder at the start of the experiment, and one minute later. 

### 80 

### 60 

### 40 

### 20 

 cm 3 

### 80 

### 60 

### 40 

### 20 

 cm^3 

 initial measurement 

 after 1.0 minute 

 What is the rate of flow of oil through the funnel during the one minute? 

 A 0.73 cm^3 / s B 0.80 cm^3 / s C 44 cm^3 / s D 48 cm^3 / s 

**2** The graph represents the motion of a vehicle. 

### 20 

### 0 

### 0 400 

 time / s 

 speed m / s 

 What is the distance travelled by the vehicle in 400 s? 

 A 20 m B 400 m C 4000 m D 8000 m 


© UCLES 2017 0625/12/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**3** The speed-time graph represents the motion of an object. 

 18 

### 16 

### 14 

### 12 

### 10 

### 8.0 

### 6.0 

### 4.0 

### 2.0 

### 0.0 

### 0.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0 

 speed m / s 

 time / s 

 What is the average speed of the object? 

 A 2.0 m / s B 6.0 m / s C 8.5 m / s D 11 m / s 

**4** A spring is stretched by hanging a piece of metal from it. 

 spring 

 metal 

 Which name is given to the force that stretches the spring? 

 A friction 

 B mass 

 C pressure 

 D weight 


© UCLES 2017 0625/12/O/N/17 

**5** The graph shows how weight varies with mass on planet P and on planet Q. 

### 0 20 40 60 80 

### 400 

### 300 

### 200 

### 100 

### 0 

 weight / N 

 planet P 

 planet Q 

 mass / kg 

 An object weighs 400 N on planet P. The object is taken to planet Q. 

 Which row is correct? 

 mass of object on planet Q / kg 

 weight of object on planet Q / N 

 A 40 200 

 B 40 400 

 C 80 200 

 D 80 400 

**6** What is needed to determine the density of a regularly shaped block? 

 A a balance and a beaker 

 B a balance and a ruler 

 C a measuring cylinder and a beaker 

 D a measuring cylinder and a ruler 


© UCLES 2017 0625/12/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**7** The diagram shows an aircraft flying in a straight horizontal line at constant speed. 

 W is the weight of the aircraft. 

 L is the lift (upward force) due to air flow over the wings. 

 T is the thrust force due to the engine. 

 D is the air resistance (drag). 

 The diagram shows the direction of these forces. 

### D T 

### L 

### W 

 What are the relationships between the forces? 

 A L = W and T = D 

 B L = W and T is greater than D 

 C L is greater than W and T = D 

 D L is greater than W and T is greater than D 


© UCLES 2017 0625/12/O/N/17 

**8** A pivoted beam supports a load _P_ at one end and a load _Q_ at the other end. 

 The weight of the beam can be ignored. 

 30 cm 70 cm 

### P Q 

 pivot 

 The beam is balanced. 

 Which row gives possible values for P and for Q? 

### P / N Q / N 

### A 21 7 

### B 21 9 

### C 30 10 

### D 30 70 

**9** Each diagram shows a metal plate with four parallel forces acting on it. These are the only forces acting on the plates. 

 In which diagram is the plate in equilibrium? 

 A 

### 1.0 N 

### 2.0 N 

### 2.0 N 

### 1.0 N 

### B 

### 2.0 N 

### 1.0 N 

### 1.0 N 

### 2.0 N 

### C 

### 1.0 N 

### 2.0 N 

### 1.0 N 

### 2.0 N 

### D 

### 2.0 N 

### 2.0 N 

### 1.0 N 

### 2.0 N 


© UCLES 2017 0625/12/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**10** A load is attached to the end of a spring. A student pulls the load down from its rest position and releases it. It oscillates vertically and eventually comes to rest. 

 load 

 load 

 Which row gives the type of energy transferred to the apparatus, and the type of energy to which this has then been transferred when the load comes to rest? 

 type of energy transferred to the apparatus 

 type of energy to which this has then been transferred when the load comes to rest 

 A elastic energy in the spring chemical energy in the spring and in the air 

 B elastic energy in the spring thermal energy in the spring and in the air C gravitational potential energy in the load 

 chemical energy in the spring and in the air D gravitational potential energy in the load 

 thermal energy in the spring and in the air 

**11** A student runs up a flight of stairs. 

 length 

 height 

 Which information is not needed to calculate the rate at which the student is doing work against gravity? 

 A the height of the flight of stairs 

 B the length of the flight of stairs 

 C the time taken to run up the stairs 

 D the weight of the student 


© UCLES 2017 0625/12/O/N/17 

**12** A book has a mass of 400 g. 

 One of its surfaces measures 0.10 m × 0.20 m. This surface is in contact with a table. 

 The gravitational field strength g is10 N / kg. 

 What is the pressure exerted on the table due to the book? 

 A 0.08 N / m^2 B 8.0 N / m^2 C 20 N / m^2 D 200 N / m^2 

**13** The diagram shows a simple mercury barometer. 

### 90 

### 80 

### 70 

### 60 

### 50 

### 40 

### 30 

### 20 

### 10 

cm (^) vacuum metre rule mercury Which length is used to find the value of atmospheric pressure? **A** 12 cm **B** 74 cm **C** 86 cm **D** 100 cm **14** A pollen grain in a beaker of still water is viewed through a microscope. Which diagram shows the most likely movement of the pollen grain? **A B C D** 


© UCLES 2017 0625/12/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**15** The diagram shows an air-filled rubber toy. A child sits on the toy and its volume decreases. 

 The temperature of the air in the toy does not change. 

 How does the air pressure in the toy change and why? 

 pressure reason 

 A decreases air molecules move more slowly 

 B decreases air molecules strike the rubber less frequently 

 C increases air molecules move more quickly 

 D increases air molecules strike the rubber more frequently 

**16** Which row identifies the fixed points on the Celsius scale? 

 lower fixed point upper fixed point 

 A boiling point of mercury melting point of pure ice 

 B boiling point of pure water melting point of pure ice 

 C melting point of mercury boiling point of pure water 

 D melting point of pure ice boiling point of pure water 


© UCLES 2017 0625/12/O/N/17 

**17** The diagram shows an electric heater being used to heat a beaker of water and an identical beaker containing oil. Both are heated for one minute. 

 water oil 

 electric heater 

 The temperature of the water and the temperature of the oil increase steadily. The increase in temperature of the oil is much greater than that of the water. 

 Why is this? 

 A Oil has a higher boiling point than water. 

 B Oil has a lower boiling point than water. 

 C The oil has a larger thermal capacity than the water. 

 D The oil has a smaller thermal capacity than the water. 

**18** Which statement about the direction of a change of state is correct? 

 A Evaporation is the reverse process to boiling. 

 B Evaporation is the reverse process to condensation. 

 C Evaporation is the reverse process to melting. 

 D Evaporation is the reverse process to solidification. 


© UCLES 2017 0625/12/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**19** Three cups are made from the same insulating material. 

 cup 1 cup 2 cup 3 

 The cups are each filled with the same volume of hot tea. 

 In which cup does the tea cool most quickly and in which cup does it cool most slowly? 

 most quickly most slowly 

 A 1 3 

 B 2 1 

 C 3 2 

 D 3 1 

**20** Why does a balloon filled with hot air rise? 

 A Cold air is less dense than hot air. 

 B Cold air is more dense than hot air. 

 C Heat rises. 

 D The density of the balloon is greater than the density of the surrounding gas. 

**21** A wave moves along the surface of water. 

 What is the wavelength of the wave? 

 A the distance between one crest and the next crest 

 B the distance that a crest moves along the surface in one second 

 C the distance that a particle of water moves up and down 

 D the number of waves that pass a fixed point in one second 


© UCLES 2017 0625/12/O/N/17 

**22** The diagram represents plane wavefronts of a water wave about to strike a solid barrier. 

 wavefronts 

 Which diagram shows the position of the wavefronts after reflection at the barrier? 

 reflected 

### A 

 reflected 

### B 

 reflected 

### C 

 reflected 

### D 


© UCLES 2017 0625/12/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**23** The diagram shows an object O in front of a thin converging lens of focal length _f_. 

 At which point will the lens form a sharp image of the object? 

 f f 

### A 

### B 

### C 

### D 

### O 

**24** The diagram shows light travelling from glass to air. 

 air 

 glass 

### 20 ° 

### 50 ° 

 What is the angle of refraction for this ray of light? 

 A 20 ° B 40 ° C 50 ° D 70 ° 

**25** Which piece of equipment is designed to produce a type of electromagnetic wave? 

 A electric fire 

 B electric generator 

 C electric motor 

 D electromagnet 

**26** What is ultrasound? 

 A sound waves that are so loud that they damage human hearing 

 B sound waves that are too high-pitched for humans to hear 

 C sound waves that are too low-pitched for humans to hear 

 D sound waves that are too quiet for humans to hear 


© UCLES 2017 0625/12/O/N/17 

**27** A student finds that it takes sound 0.33 seconds to travel 100 metres. 

 From this information, what is the speed of sound? 

 A 30 m / s B 60 m / s C 300 m / s D 600 m / s 

**28** A train of steel nails and a train of iron nails hang from a strong magnet. 

 magnet 

 train of steel nails 

 train of iron nails 

 The trains are then carefully removed from the magnet. 

 What happens to the trains? 

 A Both trains fall apart. 

 B Both trains stay together. 

 C Only the train of iron nails falls apart. 

 D Only the train of steel nails falls apart. 

**29** Two circuits are set up as shown. The iron rods are placed close together and are able to move. 

### X 

### S 

 iron rod iron rod 

 What happens to the size of the gap at X when switch S is closed? 

 A It decreases. 

 B It decreases then increases. 

 C It increases. 

 D It does not change. 


© UCLES 2017 0625/12/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**30** Which circuit can be used to determine the resistance of resistor R? 

### A 

### A 

### V A 

### B 

### V A 

### C 

### V 

### A 

### D 

### R R 

### R 

### R 

### V 

**31** A wire has a resistance _R_. 

 A second wire made from the same metal has double the length and has double the diameter of the first wire. 

 What is the resistance of the second wire? 

### A 

### 2 

_R_ (^) **B** _R_ **C** 4 _R_ **D** 8 _R_ **32** The circuit diagram shows a 4.0 Ω resistor and an 8.0 Ω resistor connected to a 6.0 V battery. 

### 4.0 Ω 8.0 Ω 

### 6.0 V 

 What is the potential difference (p.d.) across the 4.0 Ω resistor? 

 A 0.5 V B 2.0 V C 4.0 V D 6.0 V 


© UCLES 2017 0625/12/O/N/17 

**33** The diagram shows a motor and a light-dependent resistor (LDR) connected in a circuit. 

### M 

 Which change decreases the current in the motor so that it turns more slowly? 

 A connecting a resistor in parallel with the LDR 

 B connecting a resistor in series with the LDR 

 C exchanging the positions of the motor and the LDR in the circuit 

 D increasing the brightness of the light falling on the LDR 

**34** The diagram shows a circuit with a fixed resistor connected in series with a thermistor and an ammeter. 

### A 

 Which row shows how temperature change affects the resistance of the thermistor and the current in the circuit? 

 temperature resistance of thermistor 

 current in circuit 

 A decreases decreases increases 

 B decreases increases decreases 

 C increases decreases decreases 

 D increases increases increases 


© UCLES 2017 0625/12/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**35** An appliance is connected to a mains supply. Its circuit also contains a switch and a fuse. 

 Which circuit shows the fuse in the correct position? 

 live 

 neutral 

 appliance 

 live 

 neutral 

 appliance 

### A B 

 live 

 neutral 

 appliance 

 live 

 neutral 

 appliance 

### C D 

**36** The diagram shows a bar magnet and a coil of wire. The bar magnet is moved at the same speed in each experiment. 

 In which situation is the largest electromotive force (e.m.f.) induced? 

 bar magnet coil 

 moves right stationary 

### A 

 bar magnet coil 

 moves left stationary 

### B 

 bar magnet coil 

 moves right 

 moves left at same speed as bar magnet 

### C 

 bar magnet coil 

 moves left 

 moves left at same speed as bar magnet 

### D 


© UCLES 2017 0625/12/O/N/17 

**37** Diagram 1 shows a wire carrying an electric current. The wire is between the poles of a magnet. 

 The current and the magnetic field produce a force on the wire which is upwards, as shown. 

# N S 

 current 

 force 

 diagram 1 

# S N 

 current 

 diagram 2 

 The magnetic poles and the current are now both reversed, as in diagram 2. 

 In which direction is the force on the wire in diagram 2? 

 A downwards 

 B towards the North pole of the magnet 

 C towards the South pole of the magnet 

 D upwards 

**38** A nuclide of radon-222 is represented by 22286 Rn. 

 How many protons and how many neutrons are in a nucleus of this nuclide? 

 protons neutrons 

 A 86 136 

 B 86 222 

 C 222 86 

 D 222 136 


© UCLES 2017 0625/12/O/N/17 

**39** A radioactive source emits three types of radiation R, S and T. 

 The diagram shows an experiment set up to study the penetrating properties of R, S and T. 

 paper few mm of aluminium 

 few cm of lead 

### R 

### T 

### S 

 Which types of radiation are R, S and T? 

### R S T 

 A α-particles β-particles γ-rays 

 B α-particles γ-rays β-particles 

 C β-particles α-particles γ-rays 

 D γ-rays β-particles α-particles 

**40** A radioactive source has a half-life of 0.5 hours. 

 A detector near the source shows a reading of 6000 counts per second. 

 Background radiation can be ignored. 

 What is the reading on the detector 1.5 hours later? 

 A 750 counts per second 

 B 1500 counts per second 

 C 2000 counts per second 

 D 3000 counts per second 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2017 0625/12/O/N/17 

### BLANK PAGE 


