 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. IB15 03_0620_12/2RP© UCLES 2015 [Turn over 

# *8505533334* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/12 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice February/March 2015 Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet^ 45 Minutes Soft clean eraserSoft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid.Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you.DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

There areanswers A (^) ,forty B, C questions on this paper. Answerand D. all questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet.A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2015 0620/12/F/M/15 

# 1 A crystal of purple potassium manganate(VII) was added to each of the beakers shown in the 

 diagram. 

 hot water cold water 

 crystal of potassium 

# manganate(VII) 

 One beaker contained hot water and the other beaker contained cold water. 

# In both beakers the purple colour of the potassium manganate(VII) spreads out. 

 Which result and explanation are correct? result explanation A colour spreads faster in cold water particles move faster at a higher temperature B colour spreads faster in cold water particles move slower at a higher temperature C colour spreads faster in hot water particles move faster at a higher temperature D colour spreads faster in hot water particles move slower at a higher temperature 

2 During a reaction, the following changes take place. 1 The temperature rises. 2 A gas is given off. Which apparatus is required to measure the rate of this reaction? A balance and burette B balance and gas syringe C gas syringe and burette D gas syringe and stopclock 

3 Which statement about bonding is not correct? A Carbon can form four single covalent bonds. B Chlorine atoms react to gain a noble gas electronic structure. C Covalent bonding involves losing and gaining electrons. D Hydrogen molecules have the formula H 2. 


© UCLES 2015 0620/12/F/M/15 [Turn over 

4 The table shows the numbers of particles present in the nuclei of four atoms or ions. 

 protons neutrons electronic structure 1 18 22 2,8,8 2 19 20 2,8,8 3 19 21 2,8,8,1 4 20 20 2,8,8,2 Which two particles belong to the same element? A 1 and 2 B 1 and 4 C 2 and 3 D 2 and 4 

5 Which substance is an ionic compound? 

 volatility electrical conductivitywhen molten solubility in water A high good soluble B high poor insoluble C low good soluble D low poor insoluble 

6 Covalent bonds are formed when electrons are ……1……. Most covalent compounds have ……2…… electrical conductivity. Which words correctly complete gaps 1 and 2? 1 2 A shared high B shared low C transferred high D transferred low 

7 Which equation for the reaction between sodium carbonate and dilute hydrochloric acid is correct? A Na 2 CO 3 (s) + HCl (aq) → NaCl (aq) + CO 2 (g) + H 2 O(I) B Na 2 CO 3 (s) + HCl (aq) → Na 2 Cl (aq) + CO 2 (g) + H 2 O(I) C Na 2 CO 3 (s) + 2HCl (aq) → NaCl (aq) + CO 2 (g) + H 2 O(I) D Na 2 CO 3 (s) + 2HCl (aq) → 2NaCl (aq) + CO 2 (g) + H 2 O(I) 


© UCLES 2015 0620/12/F/M/15 

8 The diagram shows an electrolysis experiment. 

 electrode P 

## X 

 electrode Q 

 During the electrolysis, sodium was formed at electrode P and chlorine at electrode Q. Which row correctly identifies P, Q and X? P Q X 

A anode cathode (^) sodium chloride in waterconcentrated solution of B anode cathode molten sodium chloride C cathode anode concentrated solution of sodium chloride in water D cathode anode molten sodium chloride 9 The diagram shows apparatus for plating a spoon with silver. spoon metal electrode electrolyte Which statement is not correct? A Silver would stick to the spoon because it is a very reactive metal. B The electrolyte would be a silver salt dissolved in water. C The metal electrode would be made from silver. D The spoon would be connected to the negative terminal of the power supply. 


© UCLES 2015 0620/12/F/M/15 [Turn over 

10 Limestone can be changed into slaked lime in two chemical reactions. 1 When limestone, CaCO 3 , is heated it decomposes into lime, CaO. 2 Water is slowly dripped onto the cooled lime. The lime appears to expand andsteam is produced. Slaked lime, Ca(OH) 2 , is formed. Which row shows the correct description of each of the chemical reactions? reaction 1 reaction 2 A endothermic endothermic B endothermic exothermic C exothermic endothermic D exothermic exothermic 

11 A student investigates the rate of reaction between marble chips and hydrochloric acid. The mass of the reaction flask is measured. The graph shows the results of two experiments, P and Q. 

## 0 

 mass of reaction flask 

 time 

## P 

## Q 

 Which change explains the difference between P and Q? A A catalyst is added in P. B A higher temperature is used in P. C Bigger marble chips are used in Q. D Hydrochloric acid is more concentrated in Q. 


© UCLES 2015 0620/12/F/M/15 

# 12 Hydrated cobalt(II) chloride decomposes on heating. 

 The equation for the reaction is CoCl 2 .6H 2 O CoCl 2 + 6H 2 O The reaction is reversed by adding water. Which row describes the colour change and the type of reaction for the reverse reaction? colour change type of reaction A blue to pink endothermic B blue to pink exothermic C pink to blue endothermic D pink to blue exothermic 

13 When copper is heated in air a black coating forms on the copper. What happens to the copper in this reaction? A The copper catches fire. B The copper decomposes. C The copper gains oxygen. D The copper loses oxygen. 

14 Three chemicals, P, Q and R, were each dissolved in water. The table shows some of thereactions of these solutions. 

 solution reaction when solid sodiumcarbonate is added reaction when heated withsolid ammonium chloride P gas evolved no reaction Q no reaction gas evolved R no reaction no reaction The pH of the three solutions was also measured. What are the correct pH values of these solutions? P Q R A 2 7 13 B 2 13 7 C 7 2 13 D 13 7 2 


© UCLES 2015 0620/12/F/M/15 [Turn over 

15 The oxide of element X forms a solution with pH 4. The oxide of element Y forms a solution that turns Universal Indicator blue. Which row correctly classifies elements X and Y? element X element Y A metal metal B metal non-metal C non-metal metal D non-metal non-metal 

16 Which two processes are involved in the preparation of magnesium sulfate from dilute sulfuric acid and an excess of magnesium oxide? A neutralisation and filtration B neutralisation and oxidation C thermal decomposition and filtration D thermal decomposition and oxidation 

17 Which statement about aqueous sodium hydroxide is correct? A When it is added to a solution containing sulfate ions, a white precipitate is formed. 

# B When it is added to a solution of copper(II) ions, a blue precipitate is formed which dissolves 

 in excess to give deep blue solution. 

# C When it is added to a solution of iron(dissolve in excess. II) ions, a green precipitate is formed which does not 

 D When it is added to ammonium chloride, a gas is produced which turns blue litmus red. 

18 Which pair of elements will react together most violently? A chlorine and lithium B chlorine and potassium C iodine and lithium D iodine and potassium 


© UCLES 2015 0620/12/F/M/15 

19 The table shows some information about elements in Group VII of the Periodic Table. 

 name state at roomtemperature colour chlorine gas yellow-green bromine liquid brown iodine?? astatine solid black Which information about iodine completes the table? state colour A liquid black B liquid green C solid grey D solid yellow 

20 The diagram shows a section of the Periodic Table. Which element is described below? ‘A colourless, unreactive gas that is denser than air.’ **A B C D** 

21 Which is not a characteristic property of transition metals? A act as catalysts B form coloured compounds C high melting point D low density 


© UCLES 2015 0620/12/F/M/15 [Turn over 

22 Which statement is correct for all metals? A conduct electricity when molten B gain electrons when they form ions C have a low density D have a low melting point 

23 Metal X lies between zinc and iron in the reactivity series. Which statements about metal X are correct? 1 It reacts with steam to produce hydrogen gas. 2 It does not react with steam but will produce hydrogen with dilute acid. 3 The metal can be obtained from its oxide by heating strongly with charcoal. 4 The metal oxide cannot be reduced using carbon. A 1 and 3 B 1 and 4 C 2 and 3 D 2 and 4 

24 Which of these gases is an atmospheric pollutant? 1 carbon monoxide 2 nitrogen dioxide 3 sulfur dioxide A 1 only B 2 only C 3 only D 1, 2 and 3 

25 Molten iron from the blast furnace contains impurities. The process of turning the impure iron into steel involves blowing oxygen into the molten iron andadding calcium oxide. What are the reasons for blowing in oxygen and adding calcium oxide? blowing in oxygen adding calcium oxide A carbon is removed by reacting with oxygen reacts with acidic impurities making slag B carbon is removed by reacting with oxygen reacts with slag and so removes it C iron reacts with the oxygen reacts with acidic impurities making slag D iron reacts with the oxygen reacts with slag and so removes it 


© UCLES 2015 0620/12/F/M/15 

26 Some properties of aluminium are listed. 1 It has mechanical strength. 2 It is resistant to corrosion. 3 It has a low density. 4 It conducts heat. Which three properties make aluminium useful for making the bodies of aircraft? A 1, 2 and 3 B 1, 2 and 4 C 1, 3 and 4 D 2, 3 and 4 

27 The table describes three types of water. 

 water type 

 source of water 

 appearance before treatment treatment^ 

 appearance after treatment P river muddy none muddy Q river muddy filtration and chlorination clear R well clear chlorination only clear Which statement is correct? A Only Q and R are suitable for drinking, while P could be used for irrigation. B Only Q and R are suitable for drinking, while P is unsuitable for any purpose. C Only Q is suitable for drinking. R could be used for washing cars and P for irrigation. D P, Q and R are suitable for irrigation and washing cars, but are not suitable for drinking. 

28 A sample of air from a town centre was analysed and found to contain mainly nitrogen and oxygen, but also traces of the four gases below. Which of these gases is a pollutant? A argon B carbon dioxide C sulfur dioxide D water vapour 

29 Which elements does an NPK fertiliser contain? A nickel, phosphorus, potassium B nickel, potassium, calcium C nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium D nitrogen, potassium, calcium 


© UCLES 2015 0620/12/F/M/15 [Turn over 

30 The diagram shows experiments involving the rusting of iron. 

 water boiled to remove air 

 water anhydrous calcium chloride to dry the air 

 iron nails oil 

 tube P tube Q tube R 

 The following results were suggested. 1 In tube P, the iron nails rust. 2 In tube Q, the iron nails do not rust. 3 In tube R, the iron nails do not rust. Which results are correct? A 1 and 2 only B 1 and 3 only C 2 and 3 only D 1, 2 and 3 

31 Gas X is a waste gas from digestion in animals. Gas Y is formed when gas X is burnt with a small amount of oxygen. Gas Z is formed when gas X is burnt with an excess of oxygen. What are X, Y and Z? X Y Z A carbon dioxide methane carbon monoxide B carbon monoxide methane carbon dioxide C methane carbon dioxide carbon monoxide D methane carbon monoxide carbon dioxide 


© UCLES 2015 0620/12/F/M/15 

32 The list gives four experiments carried out with calcium carbonate. 1 acid added 2 alkali added 3 heated strongly 4 water added Which experiments produce carbon dioxide? A 1 and 2 B 1 and 3 C 2 and 3 D 2 and 4 

33 The diagram shows the soil pH range over which a vegetable grows well. The pH of the soil to be used is 5.5. 5.0 6.0 7.0 8.0 9.0 pH vegetable grows well Why is lime added to the soil before planting the vegetable? A The lime acts as a catalyst. B The lime changes the soil acidity. C The lime is an indicator. D The lime supplies nitrogen. 

34 The diagram shows the structure of a compound. H C 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## O H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

 Which functional groups does this molecule contain? carboxylicacid alkene alcohol A no no no B no yes yes C yes no yes D yes yes yes 


© UCLES 2015 0620/12/F/M/15 [Turn over 

35 Petroleum is separated into useful fractions by fractional distillation. Separation occurs in a fractionating column. Some properties of three of these fractions are shown. 

 fraction boiling pointrange / °C 

 number of carbon atoms in the molecules 1 5–10 2 320–350 16–24 3 120–210 

 Which statement is correct? A Fraction 1 has a higher boiling point range than fraction 2. B Fraction 2 is removed from a higher point in the fractioning tower than fraction 1. C Molecules in fraction 3 have shorter chains than those in fraction 2. D None of the fractions is liquid at room temperature. 

36 The structures of four molecules are shown. 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## 4 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## H C OH 

## H 

## H 

## 2 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## H C H 

## H 

## H 

## 3 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## H C C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## OH 

## H 

## 1 

 Which molecules belong to the same homologous series? A 1 and 2 B 1 and 3 C 2 and 4 D 3 and 4 

37 Which statement about alkanes is correct? A Ethane has one more carbon atom and one more hydrogen atom than methane. B They are converted to alcohols by reaction with steam. C They contain carbon-carbon double bonds. D They form carbon dioxide and water on combustion. 


© UCLES 2015 0620/12/F/M/15 

38 Which statement about alkenes is not correct? A They are hydrocarbons. B They are saturated. C They contain a C=C bond. D They form polymers. 

39 Ethene reacts with Y to produce ethanol. ethene + Y → ethanol What is Y? A hydrogen B oxygen C steam D yeast 

40 Which description of ethanoic acid is correct? A a clear, colourless and odourless liquid B a colourless liquid with a distinctive odour C a soft white solid with a distinctive odour D a transparent solid with a low melting point 


© UCLES 2015 0620/12/F/M/15 

## BLANK PAGE 


To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeInternational Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. © UCLES 2015 0620/12/F/M/15 

 Group 

(^140) **Ce** Cerium 58 141 **Pr** Praseodymium 59 (^144) **Nd** Neodymium 60 **Pm** Promethium 61 (^150) **Sm** Samarium 62 (^152) **Eu** Europium 63 (^157) **Gd** Gadolinium 64 (^159) **Tb** Terbium 65 (^162) **Dy** Dysprosium 66 (^165) **Ho** Holmium 67 167 **Er** Erbium 68 (^169) **Tm** Thulium 69 (^173) **Yb** Ytterbium 70 (^175) **Lu** Lutetium 71 (^232) **Th** Thorium 90 **Pa** Protactinium 91 238^ **U** Uranium 92 **Np** Neptunium 93 **Pu** Plutonium 94 **Am** Americium 95 **Cm** Curium 96 **Bk** Berkelium 97 **Cf** Californium 98 **Es** Einsteinium 99 **Fm** Fermium 100 **Md** Mendelevium 101 **No** Nobelium 102 **Lr** Lawrencium 103 (^1) **H** Hydrogen 1 (^7) **Li** Lithium 3 23^ **Na**^ Sodium 11 (^24) **Mg** Magnesium 1240 **Ca** Calcium 20 (^45) **Sc** Scandium 21 (^48) **Ti** Titanium 22 51 **V** Vanadium 23 (^52) **Cr** Chromium 24 (^55) **Mn** Manganese 25 (^56) **Fe** Iron 26 (^59) **Co** Cobalt 27 (^59) **Ni** Nickel 28 (^64) **Cu** Copper 29 (^65) **Zn** Zinc 30 11 **B** Boron 5 27 **A** **_l_** Aluminium 1370 **Ga** Gallium 31 (^12) **C** Carbon 6 14 **N** Nitrogen 7 (^16) **O** Oxygen 8 19 **F** Fluorine 9 (^28) **Si** Silicon 14 31 **P** Phosphorus 15 32 **S** Sulfur 16 35.5 **C** **_l_** Chlorine 17 (^40) **Ar** Argon 18 (^20) **Ne** Neon 10 (^4) **He** Helium 2 (^73) **Ge** Germanium 32 (^75) **As** Arsenic 33 (^79) **Se** Selenium 34 (^80) **Br** Bromine 35 (^84) **Kr** Krypton 36 39 **K** Potassium 19 (^88) **Sr** Strontium 38 89 **Y** Yttrium 39 (^91) **Zr** Zirconium 40 (^93) **Nb** Niobium 41 (^96) **Mo** Molybdenum 42 **Tc** Technetium 43 (^101) **Ru** Ruthenium 44 (^103) **Rh** Rhodium 45 (^106) **Pd** Palladium 46 (^108) **Ag** Silver 47 (^112) **Cd** Cadmium 48 (^115) **In** Indium 49 (^119) **Sn**^ Tin 50 (^122) **Sb** Antimony 51 (^128) **Te** Tellurium 52 127^ **I** Iodine 53 (^131) **Xe** Xenon 54 (^137) **Ba** Barium 56 (^139) **La** Lanthanum 57 * 178 **Hf** Hafnium 72 (^181) **Ta** Tantalum 73 184 **W** Tungsten 74 (^186) **Re** Rhenium 75 (^190) **Os** Osmium 76 (^192) **Ir** Iridium 77 195 **Pt** Platinum 78 (^197) **Au** Gold 79 (^201) **Hg** Mercury 80 204 **T** **_l_** Thallium 81 (^207) **Pb** Lead 82 209 **Bi** Bismuth 83 **Po** Polonium 84 **At** Astatine 85 **Rn** Radon 86 **Fr** Francium 87 (^227) **Ac** Actinium 89 (^9) **Be** Beryllium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ 0 (^85) **Rb** Rubidium 37133 **Cs** Caesium 55 (^226) **Ra** Radium 88 The volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). a **X** b a = relative atomic mass= atomic symbol **X**^ b = proton (atomic) number *58-71 Lanthanoid series90-103 Actinoid seriesKey **DATA SHEET The Periodic Table of the Elements** 


