 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all questions. Electronic calculators may be used. You may lose marks if you do not show your working or if you do not use appropriate units. Practical notes are provided on page 8. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. 

 CHEMISTRY 0620/52 Paper 5 Practical Test February/March 2015 1 hour 15 minutes Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: As listed in the Confidential Instructions 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certifi cate of Secondary Education 

 This document consists of 7 printed pages and 1 blank page. 

 [Turn over 

 IB15 03_0620_52/3RP © UCLES 2015 

# *7312444178* 

 For Examiner’s Use 

 Total 

 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 


© UCLES 2015 0620/52/F/M/15 

## BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2015 0620/52/F/M/15 **[Turn over** 

**1** You are going to investigate the solubility of salt **D** in water at various temperatures. 

 Read all the instructions below carefully before starting the experiments. 

 Instructions You are going to carry out four experiments. 

 (a) Experiment 1 

 You are provided with a clean boiling tube containing 4 g of salt D. Fill the burette provided with distilled water and add 10.0 cm 3 of water to the boiling tube. Heat the mixture of salt D and water carefully until all of the solid has dissolved. 

 Remove the boiling tube from the heat and allow the solution to cool. Stir the solution gently with the thermometer. 

 Note the temperature at which crystals fi rst appear and record the temperature in the table at the top of page 4. 

 Keep the boiling tube and its contents for the remaining three experiments in this question. 

 (b) Experiment 2 

 From the burette, add a further 2.0 cm^3 of water to the boiling tube and contents from Experiment 1. 

 Heat the mixture to dissolve the crystals as before. Find the temperature at which crystals first appear. It will help if the boiling tube is dipped for short periods of time in a beaker of cold water to speed up the rate of cooling. Record, in the table, the total volume of water in the boiling tube and the temperature at which crystals first appear. 

 (c) Experiment 3 

 From the burette, add a further 2.0 cm^3 of water to the boiling tube and contents from Experiment 2. Repeat the experiment exactly as before. Record, in the table, the total volume of water in the boiling tube and the temperature at which crystals first appear. 


 © UCLES 2015 0620/52/F/M/15 

 (d) Experiment 4 

 From the burette, add a further 4.0 cm^3 of water to the boiling tube and contents from Experiment 3. Repeat the experiment exactly as before. Note all the results in the table. 

 At the end of Experiment 4, the total volume of water in the boiling tube will be 18.0 cm 3. 

 Experiment number 

 total volume of water / cm^3 

 temperature at which crystals first appear / °C 

 1 10.0 2 

 3 

 4 [5] 

 (e) Plot the results on the grid below and draw a smooth line graph. 

## 8 10 12 14 16 

 total volume of water / cm^3 

## 18 20 22 

temperature at which crystals first appear / °C 

## [5] 


© UCLES 2015 0620/52/F/M/15 **[Turn over** 

 (f) From your graph , find the temperature at which crystals of D would first appear if the total volume of water in the solution was 20.0 cm 3. Show clearly on the grid how you worked out your answer. 

 ..............................°C [2] 

 (g) How did you know when salt D was completely dissolved in the water? 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

 (h) The solubility of salt D at 100 °C is 57 g in 100 cm 3 of water. 

 Suggest, with a reason, the effect of using 8 g of salt D instead of 4 g in these experiments. 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [2] 

 (i) Salt C is less soluble in water than salt D. 

 Sketch on the grid the graph you would expect for salt C. Label this graph. [2] 

 (j) Describe and explain one improvement that could be made to the experimental method to obtain more reliable results in this investigation. 

 improvement .............................................................................................................................. 

 explanation ................................................................................................................................ 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [2] 

 [Total: 19] 

 Before moving on to Question 2 , carefully place your solution of salt D , boiling tube, stopper and thermometer into the container labelled waste for Question 1. 


© UCLES 2015 0620/52/F/M/15 

**2** You are provided with two metal salt solutions, **E** and **F**. Carry out the following tests on **E** and **F** , recording all of your observations in the table. Conclusions must **not** be written in the table. 

 tests observations 

 tests on solution E 

 (a) Describe the appearance of solution E. ................................................................ [1] 

 Divide the solution into three equal portions in separate test-tubes. 

 (b) To the first portion of the solution, add a few drops of dilute nitric acid and about 1 cm^3 of aqueous barium nitrate. ................................................................ [2] 

 (c) To the second portion of the solution, add excess aqueous sodium hydroxide and shake the mixture. 

 Filter the mixture. Gently warm the filtrate and test the gas given off. 

 Note how the residue on the filter paper changes after five minutes. 

## ................................................................ [1] 

## ...................................................................... 

## ................................................................ [2] 

## ................................................................ [1] 

 (d) To the third portion of the solution, add about 1 cm 3 of aqueous potassium 

# manganate(VII). 

 Now add aqueous sodium hydroxide to the mixture. 

## ................................................................ [1] 

## ................................................................ [2] 

 tests on solution F 

 (e) (i) Describe the appearance of solution F. 

 (ii) Test the pH of solution F. 

## ................................................................ [1] 

## ................................................................ [1] 

 (f) Add a few zinc granules to the solution F provided in the boiling tube. Shake the tube every minute. Note how the colour of the solution changes over the next five minutes. 

## ...................................................................... 

## ................................................................ [3] 


© UCLES 2015 0620/52/F/M/15 **[Turn over** 

 (g) What conclusions can you draw about solution E? 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [4] 

 (h) What conclusions can you draw about solution F? 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [2] 

 [Total: 21] 


© UCLES 2015 0620/52/F/M/15 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

## NOTES FOR USE IN QUALITATIVE ANALYSIS 

**Test for anions** 

 anion test test result carbonate (CO 3 2–^ ) add dilute acid effervescence, carbon dioxide produced chloride (C l –^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify with dilute nitric acid, then add aqueous silver nitrate 

 white ppt. 

 iodide (I–^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify with dilute nitric acid, then add aqueous silver nitrate 

 yellow ppt. 

 nitrate (NO 3 –^ ) [in solution] 

 add aqueous sodium hydroxide then aluminium foil; warm carefully 

 ammonia produced 

 sulfate (SO 4 2–^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify with dilute nitric acid, then aqueous barium nitrate 

 white ppt. 

**Test for aqueous cations** 

 cation effect of aqueous sodium hydroxide effect of aqueous ammonia 

 aluminium (A l 3+^ ) 

 white ppt., soluble in excess giving a colourless solution 

 white ppt., insoluble in excess 

 ammonium (NH 4 +) ammonia produced on warming – 

 calcium (Ca 2+^ ) white ppt., insoluble in excess no ppt., or very slight white ppt. 

 copper (Cu 2+^ ) light blue ppt., insoluble in excess light blue ppt., soluble in excess giving a dark blue solution 

# iron(II) (Fe2+^ ) green ppt., insoluble in excess green ppt., insoluble in excess 

# iron(III) (Fe3+^ ) red-brown ppt., insoluble in excess red-brown ppt., insoluble in excess 

 zinc (Zn 2+^ ) white ppt., soluble in excess giving a colourless solution 

 white ppt., soluble in excess giving a colourless solution 

**Test for gases** 

 gas test and test results 

 ammonia (NH 3 ) turns damp red litmus paper blue 

 carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) turns limewater milky 

chlorine (C _l_ (^) 2 ) bleaches damp litmus paper hydrogen (H 2 ) ‘pops’ with a lighted splint oxygen (O 2 ) relights a glowing splint 


