 This document has 12 pages. Blank pages are indicated. 

 IB20 06_0455_12/3RP 

© UCLES 2020 (^) **[Turn over** 

## *0782155617* 

# Cambridge IGCSE 

## ™ 

### ECONOMICS 0455/12 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice May/June 2020 45 minutes 

 You must answer on the multiple choice answer sheet. 

 You will need: Multiple choice answer sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 INSTRUCTIONS 

- There are **thirty** questions on this paper. Answer **all** questions. 

- For each question there are four possible answers **A** , **B** , **C** and **D**. Choose the **one** you consider correct     and record your choice in soft pencil on the multiple choice answer sheet. 

- Follow the instructions on the multiple choice answer sheet. 

- Write in soft pencil. 

- Write your name, centre number and candidate number on the multiple choice answer sheet in the     spaces provided unless this has been done for you. 

- Do **not** use correction fluid. 

- Do **not** write on any bar codes. 

- You may use a calculator. 

 INFORMATION 

- The total mark for this paper is 30. 

- Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. 

- Any rough working should be done on this question paper. 


© UCLES 2020 0455/12/M/J/20 

**1** In 2016, 20 billion barrels of oil and 1.6 billion barrels of natural gas were discovered in Texas, US. 

 Which factor of production has increased in the US due to this discovery? 

 A capital 

 B enterprise 

 C labour 

 D land 

**2** The diagram shows a production possibility curve (PPC). 

 Which of these points shows the largest possible output of product Y currently achievable? 

 product Y 

### O 

 product X 

### A 

### C 

### B 

### D 

**3** A student decides to take up a two year apprenticeship for which she will earn $10 000 per year. After that she expects to earn $25 000 per year. She could take an unskilled job which pays $16 000 per year instead of the apprenticeship. 

 What is the opportunity cost in the two years of completing the apprenticeship? 

 A $10 000 B $12 000 C $25 000 D $32 000 

**4** Microeconomics analyses choices in various situations. 

 Which area of economic study does it not include? 

 A costs and revenues of a firm 

 B individual consumer behaviour 

 C policies for economic growth 

 D wages for different occupations 


© UCLES 2020 0455/12/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**5** What is a cause of market failure? 

 A many firms 

 B monopoly 

 C profit maximisation 

 D specialisation 

**6** The diagrams show the supply curve for an individual grower of tomatoes and for the total market supply of tomatoes. 

### 1000 3000 

 individual grower 

### 6000 

### 3.0 

### 1.5 

### 0.5 

### 0 

 price per kg ($) 

 quantity (kilograms) 

### 100 000 300 000 

 total market 

### 600 000 

### 3.0 

### 1.5 

### 0.5 

### 0 

 price per kg ($) 

 quantity (tonnes) 

 What explains the similarity of the two curves? 

 A As costs rise growers need to get a higher price to increase output. 

 B At the lower prices each grower supplies more tomatoes. 

 C The profitability per unit is the same for all growers irrespective of output. 

 D Supply is not always influenced by price. 

**7** The price of bread rose by 5% and the quantity demanded fell by 4%. 

 What was the price elasticity of demand for bread? 

 A –0.4 B –0.8 C –1.25 D –2.0 


© UCLES 2020 0455/12/M/J/20 

**8** Saudi Arabia specialises in oil extraction and refining. This is a capital-intensive industry with highly skilled labour. 

 What might be a disadvantage of this specialisation? 

 A Oil companies have increased training costs as each worker needs many different skills. 

 B Oil companies may find it difficult to achieve economies of scale. 

 C Resource allocation is not efficient because a narrow range of goods is being produced. 

 D Workers may face a restricted range of job opportunities. 

**9** What would **most** likely cause a person to increase their savings? 

 A a decision to plan for retirement 

 B a fall in income 

 C a fall in interest rates 

 D a reduction in tax-free saving schemes 

**10** The graph shows women’s wages as a percentage of men’s wages in year 1 and year 2. 

 percent 

### 85 

### 80 

### 75 

### 70 

### 65 

### 60 

### 55 

### 27 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 62 

 age 

 year 2 

 year 1 

 Which statement is shown by the graph to be true? 

 A Younger women earn more than older women. 

 B Women’s wages remain about the same between the ages of 40–50. 

 C In year 2, all women were earning more than men. 

 D In year 2, women were earning a higher percentage of men’s wages than in year 1. 


© UCLES 2020 0455/12/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**11** People’s income decreases. 

 How is the proportion spent on food and leisure likely to change? 

 food leisure 

 A decrease decrease 

 B decrease increase 

 C increase decrease 

 D increase increase 

**12** The table shows total fixed and total variable costs at different levels of output for a firm. 

 output 

 total fixed cost $ 

 total variable cost $ 

 100 1000 1000 

 200 1000 1500 

 300 1000 2000 

 400 1000 2500 

 What happens as output rises? 

 A Average fixed cost falls. 

 B Average fixed cost rises. 

 C Average variable cost remains constant. 

 D Average variable cost rises. 

**13** The following information refers to a firm producing shoes. 

 At which level of output does the firm maximise profits? 

 total output of pairs of shoes 

 total cost ($) 

 total revenue ($) 

 A 100 1000 1300 

 B 200 1800 2200 

 C 300 2700 3000 

 D 400 3200 3400 


© UCLES 2020 0455/12/M/J/20 

**14** Which statement proves there has been an increase in productivity for a factory making tractors? 

 A 10% more workers results in a 10% increase in tractors produced each week. 

 B Output per worker increases from 3 tractors to 4 tractors per month. 

 C Production increases as more workers are hired. 

 D Starting a night shift leads to an increase in production of 10 tractors a day. 

**15** When do economies of scale take place? 

 A in the short run 

 B if variable factors become fixed 

 C when all factors of production are fixed 

 D when all factors of production are variable 

**16** What is **not** included in public expenditure? 

 A capital spending by firms 

 B interest payments on government borrowing 

 C investment in defence by the central government 

 D subsidies to bus companies from local government 

**17** When is the budget described as balanced? 

 A when direct taxes and indirect taxes are equal 

 B when exports and imports are equal 

 C when government spending and government revenue are equal 

 D when the demand for money and the supply of money are equal 

**18** A government increased revenue by increasing taxes on firms. 

 Which tax did it increase? 

 A inheritance tax 

 B profits tax 

 C sales tax 

 D value added tax 


© UCLES 2020 0455/12/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**19** Why are governments responsible for the defence of the country? 

 A It is impossible to charge a price for defence. 

 B It prevents individual citizens having access to weapons. 

 C Only governments can manufacture weapons. 

 D Providing defence is very expensive. 

**20** Information about job vacancies on a government website has led to a decrease in short-term unemployment. 

 What is the term for this type of unemployment? 

 A cyclical unemployment 

 B frictional unemployment 

 C structural unemployment 

 D technological unemployment 

**21** The table shows figures for the real GDP of a country. 

 quarter 1 ($bn) 

 quarter 2 ($bn) 

 quarter 3 ($bn) 

 quarter 4 ($bn) 

 100 101 99 98 

 A quarter is three months. 

 During which quarters was the country experiencing a recession? 

 A quarters 1 and 2 

 B quarters 2 and 3 

 C quarters 3 and 4 

 D the entire period 

**22** What would **not** be required in the construction of an index of consumer prices? 

 A the selection of a base year 

 B the selection of a representative range of items 

 C the calculation of average wage levels 

 D the weighting of each item in the index 


© UCLES 2020 0455/12/M/J/20 

**23** The table gives information about three economic indicators in four countries. 

 rate of inflation % 

 rate of interest % 

 rate of unemployment % 

 country W 1.4 3.4 10.2 

 country X 3.7 8.7 12.3 

 country Y 3.6 7.3 14.2 

 country Z 2.1 6.0 7.7 

 What may be concluded from this information? 

 A Countries with higher inflation have higher interest rates. 

 B Countries with higher interest rates have lower unemployment. 

 C The country with the lowest inflation had the highest unemployment. 

 D The country with the lowest unemployment had the lowest inflation. 

**24** Due to war, some people are living in absolute poverty. 

 What is the main indicator of absolute poverty for these people? 

 A dependence on aid for medical treatment 

 B lack of transport to escape abroad 

 C living in tents in temporary camps 

 D receiving insufficient food for basic nutrition 

**25** Which country would be classified as the **most** developed based on the data in the table? 

 country 

 gross domestic product per year ($m) 

 population (millions) 

### A 600 3 

### B 700 2 

### C 12 000 40 

### D 15 000 100 


© UCLES 2020 0455/12/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**26** Which changes usually result when a country develops and is able to provide free healthcare and good living conditions? 

 birth rate death rate 

 labour productivity 

 A falls falls rises 

 B falls rises falls 

 C rises falls falls 

 D rises rises rises 

**27** Which protectionist measure would be most suitable for a government to use to support the growth in exports of an industry? 

 A embargo 

 B quota 

 C subsidy 

 D tariff 

**28** There has been an appreciation of the value of a country’s currency against other currencies. 

 What effects will this have on prices of imports of raw materials and prices of exports of manufactured goods? 

 prices of imports of raw materials 

 prices of exports of manufactured goods 

 A cheaper cheaper 

 B cheaper more expensive 

 C more expensive cheaper 

 D more expensive more expensive 

**29** What is a disadvantage of increased specialisation by a country? 

 A It becomes more reliant on imports to meet all its needs. 

 B It reduces the potential for international trade. 

 C It results in access to a greater variety of goods for consumers. 

 D It results in lower costs for home produced goods. 


© UCLES 2020 0455/12/M/J/20 

**30** The table shows components of Japan’s current account balance in trillion Yen (¥) for 2011 and 2012. 

 year 

 balance of goods ¥ trillion 

 balance of services ¥ trillion 

 balance of primary income ¥ trillion 

 balance of secondary income ¥ trillion 

 2011 –1.61 –1.76 14.04 –1.11 

 2012 –5.23 –2.33 13.55 –1.02 

 Which balance improved between 2011 and 2012? 

 A balance of goods 

 B balance of services 

 C balance of primary income 

 D balance of secondary income 


© UCLES 2020 0455/12/M/J/20 

### BLANK PAGE 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2020 0455/12/M/J/20 

### BLANK PAGE 


