# Cambridge IGCSE™ 

 DC (JC) 184590/2 © UCLES 2020 [Turn over 

 This document has 8 pages. Blank pages are indicated. 

* 7 3 1 1 5 8 5 9 8 1 * 

## ECONOMICS 0455/22 

 Paper 2 Structured Questions May/June 2020 

 2 hours 15 minutes 

 You must answer on the enclosed answer booklet. 

 You will need: Answer booklet (enclosed) 

 INSTRUCTIONS ● Answer four questions in total: Section A: answer Question 1. Section B: answer three questions. ● Follow the instructions on the front cover of the answer booklet. If you need additional answer paper, ask the invigilator for a continuation booklet. ● You may use a calculator. 

 INFORMATION ● The total mark for this paper is 90. ● The number of marks for each question or part question is shown in brackets [ ]. 


 Section A 

Read the source material carefully before answering Question 1. 

**Source material: the challenges facing Pakistan** 

 Pakistan fact file 2016 $ billion 

## 2017 

 $ billion 

 Exports of goods 20.5 25.2 

 Imports of goods 47.0 61.7 

 Government spending 40.5 43.2 

 Consumer spending 259.3 294.8 

Pakistan faces a number of economic challenges. These include responding to a rising population, improving its trade in goods balance, controlling the country’s inflation rate and increasing the country’s economic growth rate. To overcome these challenges, the Pakistani government is trying to increase investment. Currently, a high proportion of the country’s resources are used to produce consumer goods. 

The government is subsidising entrepreneurs and charities to open low-cost schools. It wants to reduce the dropout rate from schools and to raise educational standards. Some parents do not recognise the advantages that a merit good such as education can give their children, for example better health and better job opportunities. Some of the poor need their children to work from a young age to support the family. Government reforms have not yet led to a significant rise in teachers’ wages but have improved school buildings and the number of children attending. The qualifications required to teach may be increased in the future. 

Improved education may affect the number of skilled workers who emigrate and may raise the quantity and quality of goods and services produced. Any resulting higher income may influence the value of imports purchased, as shown in Table 1. 

 Table 1 GDP per head and imports per head in selected countries in 2017. 

 Country GDP per head ($) 

 Imports per head ($) 

 Norway 70 600 14 472 

 UK 43 600 10 419 

 South Korea 39 400 11 602 

 Russia 27 900 4 002 

 Mexico 19 500 7 343 

 Pakistan 5 400 1 143 

 Haiti 1 800 853 

Pakistan has relatively high import tariffs. Revenue from import tariffs is 45% of total tax revenue. The tariffs on vehicles, some of which have inelastic demand, are particularly high. Future Pakistani tariffs may be influenced by changes in other countries’ trade policies, as well as other factors. 


**©UCLES 2020 0455/22/M/J/20 [Turn over** 

Answer all parts to Question 1. Refer to the source material in your answers. 

**1 (a)** Calculate Pakistan’s trade in goods balance in 2017. [1] 

 (b) Identify two possible causes of demand-pull inflation in Pakistan in 2017. [2] 

 (c) Explain the opportunity cost to Pakistan of producing consumer goods. [2] 

 (d) Explain two reasons why education is a merit good. [4] 

 (e) Analyse why the children of poor families tend to receive less education than the children of rich families. [4] 

 (f) Analyse the relationship between GDP per head and imports per head. [5] 

 (g) Discuss whether or not the supply of teachers in Pakistan is likely to increase in the future. [6] 

 (h) Discuss whether or not an increase in its import tariffs would be likely to benefit the Pakistani economy. [6] 


 Section B 

 Answer any three questions. 

Each question is introduced by stimulus material. In your answer you may refer to this material and / or to other examples that you have studied. 

**2** The Indian government has declared that the country, now a major car producer, will sell only electric cars by 2030. The government wants to reduce external costs, some of which are caused by petrol and diesel cars. Demand for electric cars is currently relatively low and price-elastic. The government, however, thinks that it will not need to subsidise the production of electric cars to achieve its target. 

 (a) Define external costs. [2] 

 (b) Explain two influences on whether demand for a product is price-elastic or price-inelastic. [4] 

 (c) Analyse, using a demand and supply diagram, how a subsidy given to producers could affect the market for electric cars. [6] 

 (d) Discuss whether cars should be produced by the private sector or the public sector. [8] 

**3** A number of countries are withdrawing high value banknotes. For instance, Singapore plans to stop issuing its $10 000 note. High value notes were originally intended to act as a convenient store of value. Central banks are concerned some notes are now being used illegally. The Singapore Police Force and the Monetary Authority of Singapore (its central bank) were trying to recruit more workers in 2017. It was expected that the central bank would raise the rate of interest in 2018. 

 (a) State two functions of money, other than a store of value. [2] 

 (b) Explain two advantages banknotes have as a form of money. [4] 

 (c) Analyse the influences on the mobility of workers. [6] 

 (d) Discuss whether or not a central bank should raise the rate of interest. [8] 

**4** In 2017, the Japanese government announced improvements to its tax system. The amount of tax raised is influenced by the size and age distribution of a country’s population. Japan’s birth and death rates are falling, its population is ageing, and it has low immigration. Overall, Japan’s population is decreasing. 

 (a) State two qualities of a good tax. [2] 

 (b) Explain two causes of a decrease in the death rate. [4] 

 (c) Analyse, using a production possibility curve (PPC) diagram, the effect of a decrease in population size on an economy. [6] 

 (d) Discuss whether or not an ageing population is a benefit to an economy. [8] 


**5** Mali is a low income and low productivity country in Africa. Its government is using fiscal policy to reduce poverty. The country’s main industries are agriculture and gold mining. In recent years, however, there have been some changes in its resource allocation. The country is developing its iron ore industry. Globally, the iron ore industry is one which has experienced a significant number of mergers in recent years. 

 (a) State two key questions about how resources are allocated. [2] 

 (b) Explain two fiscal policy measures that can be used to reduce poverty. [4] 

 (c) Analyse why a country may have low productivity. [6] 

 (d) Discuss whether or not mergers benefit an economy. [8] 


## BLANK PAGE 


## BLANK PAGE 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. 

## BLANK PAGE 


