 This document has 12 pages. Blank pages are indicated. 

 IB20 06_0455_11/3RP 

© UCLES 2020 (^) **[Turn over** 

## *4018684555* 

# Cambridge IGCSE 

## ™ 

### ECONOMICS 0455/11 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice May/June 2020 45 minutes 

 You must answer on the multiple choice answer sheet. 

 You will need: Multiple choice answer sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 INSTRUCTIONS 

- There are **thirty** questions on this paper. Answer **all** questions. 

- For each question there are four possible answers **A** , **B** , **C** and **D**. Choose the **one** you consider correct     and record your choice in soft pencil on the multiple choice answer sheet. 

- Follow the instructions on the multiple choice answer sheet. 

- Write in soft pencil. 

- Write your name, centre number and candidate number on the multiple choice answer sheet in the     spaces provided unless this has been done for you. 

- Do **not** use correction fluid. 

- Do **not** write on any bar codes. 

- You may use a calculator. 

 INFORMATION 

- The total mark for this paper is 30. 

- Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. 

- Any rough working should be done on this question paper. 


© UCLES 2020 0455/11/M/J/20 

**1** What is an example of the purchase of a consumer good? 

 A A farm owner buys a television. 

 B A farm owner buys additional land. 

 C A farm owner buys fertiliser for their crops. 

 D A farm owner buys some farming equipment. 

**2** What is the function of the factors of production in an economy? 

 A to make goods and services to fulfil wants and needs 

 B to provide an even distribution of income 

 C to provide tax income for the government 

 D to reduce the existence of external costs 

**3** The diagram shows a production possibility curve (PPC) for an economy that can produce cotton and cars. The economy is at point Q. 

 output of cotton 

 output of cars 

### O 

### W 

### Z 

### Q X 

### Y 

 There is improved technology that can only be used in the production of cars. 

 How would this be represented on this diagram? 

 A by a movement from Q to W 

 B by a movement from Q to X 

 C by a movement from Q to Y 

 D by a movement from Q to Z 


© UCLES 2020 0455/11/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**4** Which topic is included in microeconomics? 

 A economic growth 

 B elasticity of demand 

 C inflation 

 D the balance of payments 

**5** What aspect of demerit goods means they are overproduced? 

 A clear product information 

 B high external costs 

 C high product taxes 

 D low customer demand 

**6** The diagram shows market demand and supply curves. 

### O 

### P 2 

 price 

 quantity 

S (^1) D (^1) 

### P 1 

### P 3 

### Q 2 Q 3 Q 1 Q 4 Q 5 

 To what extent is the market in disequilibrium at price P 3? 

 A OQ 1 – OQ 2 B OQ 1 – OQ 3 C OQ 2 – OQ 4 D OQ 3 – OQ 5 

**7** Lithium is an essential metal for the production of electric cars. Following a 10% increase in the price of lithium, supplies increase by 15%. This led to a 5% increase in the price of electric cars. 

 What is the price elasticity of supply (PES) for lithium? 

 A 0.33 B 0.66 C 1.50 D 2.0 


© UCLES 2020 0455/11/M/J/20 

**8** The wage of labour in a firm increases. 

 What is the most likely effect on the production process? 

 A Capital replaces labour immediately. 

 B Capital replaces labour in the long run. 

 C Labour replaces capital immediately. 

 D Labour replaces capital in the long run. 

**9** Which combination of influences would increase the level of borrowing by a household? 

 influence 1 influence 2 

 A becoming pensioners higher rate of inflation 

 B greater wealth lower consumer confidence 

 C higher consumer confidence lower rate of interest 

 D higher rate of interest greater availability of credit 

**10** The graph shows women’s wages as a percentage of men’s wages in year 1 and year 2. 

 percent 

### 85 

### 80 

### 75 

### 70 

### 65 

### 60 

### 55 

### 27 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 62 

 age 

 year 2 

 year 1 

 Which statement is shown by the graph to be true? 

 A Younger women earn more than older women. 

 B Women’s wages remain about the same between the ages of 40–50. 

 C In year 2, all women were earning more than men. 

 D In year 2, women were earning a higher percentage of men’s wages than in year 1. 


© UCLES 2020 0455/11/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**11** People’s income decreases. 

 How is the proportion spent on food and leisure likely to change? 

 food leisure 

 A decrease decrease 

 B decrease increase 

 C increase decrease 

 D increase increase 

**12** The table shows total fixed and total variable costs at different levels of output for a firm. 

 At which level of output is average total cost lowest? 

 output (tonnes) 

 total fixed cost ($) 

 total variable cost ($) 

 A 100 1200 1200 

 B 200 1200 2000 

 C 300 1200 2700 

 D 400 1200 3600 

**13** The following information refers to a firm producing shoes. 

 At which level of output does the firm maximise profits? 

 total output of pairs of shoes 

 total cost ($) 

 total revenue ($) 

 A 100 1000 1300 

 B 200 1800 2200 

 C 300 2700 3000 

 D 400 3200 3400 


© UCLES 2020 0455/11/M/J/20 

**14** What is **most** likely to lead to an improvement in labour productivity in an industry? 

 A an increase in capital investment 

 B an increase in income tax rates 

 C an increase in the demand for the industry’s product 

 D an increase in the number of firms in the industry 

**15** How is a government **most** likely to prevent the growth of monopolies? 

 A by encouraging mergers in the private sector 

 B by establishing nationalised industries 

 C by promoting the benefits of economies of scale 

 D by reducing barriers to entry into an industry 

**16** What is **not** included in public expenditure? 

 A capital spending by firms 

 B interest payments on government borrowing 

 C investment in defence by the central government 

 D subsidies to bus companies from local government 

**17** When is the budget described as balanced? 

 A when direct taxes and indirect taxes are equal 

 B when exports and imports are equal 

 C when government spending and government revenue are equal 

 D when the demand for money and the supply of money are equal 

**18** The government wishes to increase economic growth in its economy. 

 What would not be likely to achieve this aim? 

 A The central bank encourages bank lending. 

 B The central bank lowers interest rates. 

 C The government increases sales tax (VAT). 

 D The government subsidises new industries. 


© UCLES 2020 0455/11/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**19** The government redistributes income more evenly. 

 What is most likely to increase? 

 A the incentive to work 

 B the level of savings 

 C the need for welfare payments 

 D the rate of inflation 

**20** The table shows selected indicators for the labour market of an economy in 2014 and 2018. 

### 2014 

 (millions) 

### 2018 

 (millions) 

 total labour force 30 30 

 employed workers 25 28 

 long-term unemployed 1 2 

 employment in manufacturing 4 2 

 employment in services 13 16 

 According to the table, what is the most likely type of unemployment in 2018? 

 A cyclical 

 B frictional 

 C seasonal 

 D structural 

**21** What may directly cause economic growth? 

 A higher imports 

 B higher levels of resources 

 C higher taxation 

 D higher unemployment 

**22** What would **not** be required in the construction of an index of consumer prices? 

 A the selection of a base year 

 B the selection of a representative range of items 

 C the calculation of average wage levels 

 D the weighting of each item in the index 


© UCLES 2020 0455/11/M/J/20 

**23** The table gives information about three economic indicators in four countries. 

 rate of inflation % 

 rate of interest % 

 rate of unemployment % 

 country W 1.4 3.4 10.2 

 country X 3.7 8.7 12.3 

 country Y 3.6 7.3 14.2 

 country Z 2.1 6.0 7.7 

 What may be concluded from this information? 

 A Countries with higher inflation have higher interest rates. 

 B Countries with higher interest rates have lower unemployment. 

 C The country with the lowest inflation had the highest unemployment. 

 D The country with the lowest unemployment had the lowest inflation. 

**24** What distinguishes a more developed country from a less developed country? 

 A Inflation rates are higher in the more developed country. 

 B Interest rates are higher in the more developed country. 

 C Natural resources are higher in the more developed country. 

 D Real incomes are higher in the more developed country. 

**25** An additional 700 000 UK children and pensioners fell into relative poverty between 2013 and 2017. 

 What might be the reason for this? 

 A Direct taxes had increased, and indirect taxes had fallen. 

 B Real gross domestic product was rising faster than the population. 

 C The death rate was exceeding the birth rate. 

 D The real value of government welfare benefits had fallen. 


© UCLES 2020 0455/11/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**26** Which changes usually result when a country develops and is able to provide free healthcare and good living conditions? 

 birth rate death rate 

 labour productivity 

 A falls falls rises 

 B falls rises falls 

 C rises falls falls 

 D rises rises rises 

**27** What is a quota in international trade? 

 A a government grant to encourage production 

 B an administrative and technical barrier 

 C a limit on the quantity of imports 

 D a tax on imports 

**28** Many low-income countries rely on exports of raw materials such as coffee or iron ore to earn them foreign currency. 

 What is a disadvantage of this? 

 A Countries have a constant demand for raw materials. 

 B International trade only benefits the importing countries. 

 C It is necessary for low-income countries to belong to a free trade area. 

 D Raw materials have fluctuating prices. 

**29** What is included as part of the current account of the balance of payments? 

 A all government income and expenditure 

 B money withdrawn from a bank account 

 C investments in other countries by manufacturers 

 D trade in goods and services 


© UCLES 2020 0455/11/M/J/20 

**30** The table shows components of Japan’s current account balance in trillion Yen (¥) for 2011 and 2012. 

 year 

 balance of goods ¥ trillion 

 balance of services ¥ trillion 

 balance of primary income ¥ trillion 

 balance of secondary income ¥ trillion 

 2011 –1.61 –1.76 14.04 –1.11 

 2012 –5.23 –2.33 13.55 –1.02 

 Which balance improved between 2011 and 2012? 

 A balance of goods 

 B balance of services 

 C balance of primary income 

 D balance of secondary income 


© UCLES 2020 0455/11/M/J/20 

### BLANK PAGE 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2020 0455/11/M/J/20 

### BLANK PAGE 


