 This document consists of 10 printed pages and 2 blank pages. IB16 03_0455_12/3RP© UCLES 2016 [Turn over 

# *4330295432* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## ECONOMICS 0455/12 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice February/March 2016 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer SheetSoft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil.Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces providedunless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. There areanswers A thirty, B, C questions on this paper. Answerand D. all questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer.Any rough working should be done in this booklet. 


© UCLES 2016 0455/12/F/M/16 

1 An economy with few resources is encouraged to improve the quality of its human resources. Which policy will lead to such an improvement? A conserving and protecting more of its natural resources B limiting the immigration of skilled labour C providing more opportunities for education and training D reducing the use of machines in production 

2 The diagram shows a country’s production possibility curve for rice and wheat. 

 rice 

 O wheat 

## P 

Q (^) R S A major flood destroys a large area of agricultural land. Which movement could represent the resulting change in output? A P to Q B Q to R C R to S D S to P 3 A country raises the school leaving age from 15 to 17 years. What is the opportunity cost of this increased period of school education to the young peopleaffected? A costs of training and employing more teachers B financial help necessary for school leavers who go to university C government expenditure on building extra classrooms D lost income from paid employment because of school attendance 4 In a market there is a shortage of a good. What change would cause the market to come to an equilibrium? A a decrease in supply B a fall in price C an increase in demand D a rise in price 


© UCLES 2016 0455/12/F/M/16 [Turn over 

5 A product has a totally inelastic price elasticity of demand. What will happen to total revenue if the price of the product falls by 25%? A It will fall by 25%. B It will fall to zero. C It will remain unchanged. D It will rise by 25%. 

6 In 2014, a plan for a major new rail link funded by central and regional government wasannounced. It would involve the redevelopment of a city area, generate 14 000 jobs and allow the development of 2000 homes and offices for private businesses. What economic concepts are indicated directly in the above statement? A budget surplus and inflation B factors of production and multinational companies C fiscal policy and mixed economy D regional unemployment and average wage rates 

7 How are social costs calculated? A fixed costs plus variable costs B private benefits less private costs C private costs plus external costs D social benefits less external costs 

8 What is a disadvantage for a trade union representing workers in a company that has increasedspecialisation? 

 A Capital equipment can be substituted for labour. B Different abilities can be used fully. C Production levels are decreased. D Workers are able to gain a higher level of skill. 


© UCLES 2016 0455/12/F/M/16 

9 A government finance minister said that the purchasing power of most people’s incomes hadrisen in the last year. 

 What must have increased for the purchasing power to rise? A money wages B net income after tax C real wages D wage rates 

10 The table shows the change in incomes for a number of occupations between 2003 and 2013. 

 occupation 

 change in income % builders 80 plumbers 60 electricians 50 police officers 12 teachers 10 nurses –5 What can be concluded from the table? A All occupations were better off in 2013 than in 2003. B Builders earned the highest income in 2013. C Electricians earned 40% more than teachers in 2013. D Non-manual workers had lower percentage increases in income than manual workers. 


© UCLES 2016 0455/12/F/M/16 [Turn over 

11 The table shows information for two workers. 

 doctor window cleaner annual income ($) 60 000 24 000 total deductions ($) 10 000 8 000 Both workers save 10% of their disposable income. How much is this in each case? doctor window cleaner A $1 000 $800 B $5 000 $1 600 C $6 000 $2 400 D $50 000 $16 000 

12 What is most likely to increase a firm’s profits? A government controls on its prices B grants for the purchase of new machines C an increase in the wages paid to its workers D rising costs of its raw materials 

13 Sohrab bought shares in a French telecommunications company operating in many countries. Joel owns and runs a mobile telephone accessories and repair shop. What is not identified above? A multinational company B partnership C public company D sole proprietor 


© UCLES 2016 0455/12/F/M/16 

14 A firm’s average revenue is $20. It sells 1000 units. What is the firm’s total revenue and the price of the product? total revenue ($) 

 price ($) A 20 20 B 1 000 500 C 20 000 20 D 20 000 500 

15 The table shows the daily output and costs of four firms making chairs. Which firm has the highest average cost of production? output (units) fixed costs($) variable costs($) A 6 100 140 B 9 30 150 C 12 200 160 D 15 120 330 

16 Other things being equal, what is likely to decrease public spending? A an increase in the age of retirement B an increase in the birth rate C an increase in the school-leaving age D an increase in unemployment 

17 When is a tax regressive? A when some goods have a lower tax than others B when the tax as a proportion of income decreases as income increases C when the tax is linked to the rate of inflation D when the tax is on incomes rather than on goods or services 


© UCLES 2016 0455/12/F/M/16 [Turn over 

18 The Government of India wishes to help the very poorest people. Which policy would be most likely to achieve this? A lowering capital gains tax B lowering housing subsidies C lowering indirect taxation D lowering inheritance tax 

19 Suppose the Indian Government raises the rate of interest. What is likely to be the direct effect on the economy? A It will raise any deficit on the current account. B It will raise the economic growth rate. C It will raise the foreign exchange rate. D It will raise the inflation rate. 

20 What is involved in the construction of a retail price index? A a basket of goods B average incomes C economic growth rate D income tax rate 

21 What identifies a recession? A a fall in the general price level B a fall in the level of national output C a fall in the real value of money D a fall in the stock market index 


© UCLES 2016 0455/12/F/M/16 

22 The table shows the percentage changes in earnings and consumer prices for four countries forone year. 

 Which country is likely to have experienced the greatest increase in real income during the year? country earnings consumer prices A France +6.5 +3.5 B Germany +4.0 +4.0 C Japan +4.0 –1.0 D UK +6.5 –2.0 

23 In the US Consumer Price Index (CPI), food has a weighting of 13.7%. In India food has aweighting of 46.2% in the CPI. 

 What can be concluded from this? A Consumers in India spend more on food than US consumers. B Food is a bigger proportion of consumer spending in India than in the US. C The farming sector’s output of food is higher in India than in the US. D The price of food is rising more rapidly in India than in the US. 

24 In many developing economies there is a high rate of population growth. What is a cause of this? A Jobseekers migrate from rural to urban centres. B Poor people have many children to provide labour on family farms. C There is increased resistance to life saving drugs. D There is not enough clean water. 

25 A country has a birth rate of 30 per 1000 and a death rate of 35 per 1000 and no migration. What is most likely to cause the population to fall? A The birth rate decreases and the death rate increases. B The birth rate increases and the death rate remains the same. C The birth rate remains constant and the death rate decreases. D The increase in the birth rate is greater than the increase in the death rate. 


© UCLES 2016 0455/12/F/M/16 [Turn over 

26 The diagram shows the different age distribution of the population in three areas of the world. 

 35.1 21.5 

 under 15 

 18.1 

 60.7 65.6 

## 15-64 

## % 

 69.6 

 4.2 

 12.9 

 over 64 

 12.3 

 area X area Y area Z 

 Other things being equal, what can be deduced from the diagram? A X has the highest dependency ratio. B Y has the largest working population. C Y spends most on schools. D Z spends most on pensions. 

27 What is likely to cause a rise in a country’s foreign exchange rate? A a fall in its exports of goods and services B a fall in its imports of goods and services C a fall in its inflow of income D a rise in its outflow of transfers 

28 Drinks producers in India are resisting plans to remove tariffs on imported drinks. They claim that a reduction in tariffs would destroy the emerging drinks industry with large-scale imports of cheap drinks. Which argument for protectionism are they putting forward? A the declining industry argument B the infant industry argument C the strategic industry argument D the sunset industry argument 


© UCLES 2016 0455/12/F/M/16 

29 Who is most likely to benefit if India bans all steel imports? A buyers of steel in India B foreign steel producers C Indian firms buying steel D Indian firms selling steel at home 

30 What is certain to encourage a higher level of international trade? A conservation of resources and unstable exchange rates B exploitation of resources and wider use of quotas C increased support for home industries and increased tariffs D more specialisation and falling transport costs 


© UCLES 2016 0455/12/F/M/16 

## BLANK PAGE 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeInternational Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge LocalExaminations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2016 0455/12/F/M/16 

## BLANK PAGE 


