 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all questions. Electronic calculators may be used. You may lose marks if you do not show your working or if you do not use appropriate units. Notes for use in qualitative analysis are provided on pages 11 and 12. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/53 

 Paper 5 Practical Test October/November 2017 1 hour 15 minutes Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: As listed in the Confidential Instructions 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

 This document consists of 10 printed pages and 2 blank pages. 

 [Turn over 

 IB17 11_0620_53/4RP © UCLES 2017 

# *4303303595* 

 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 For Examiner’s Use 

 Total 


**1** You are going to investigate what happens to the temperature when two different solids, **W** and **X** , dissolve in water. 

 Read all the instructions carefully before starting the experiments. 

 Instructions You are going to carry out two experiments. 

 (a) Experiment 1 

 ● Put the polystyrene cup into the 250 cm^3 beaker for support. ● Use the measuring cylinder to pour 30 cm^3 of distilled water into the polystyrene cup. ● Measure the initial temperature of the water and record it in the table at time = 0 seconds. ● Add all of solid W to the water, start the timer and stir the solution continuously with the thermometer. ● Measure the temperature of the solution every 10 seconds for 90 seconds. ● Record your results in the table. 

 time / s 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 

 temperature of the solution / °C 

## [2] 

 (b) Experiment 2 

 ● Empty the polystyrene cup and rinse it with water. Put the polystyrene cup back into the 250 cm^3 beaker. ● Use a measuring cylinder to pour 30 cm^3 of distilled water into the polystyrene cup. ● Measure the initial temperature of the water and record it in the table at time = 0 seconds. ● Add all of solid X to the water, start the timer and stir the solution continuously with the thermometer. ● Measure the temperature of the solution every 10 seconds for 90 seconds. ● Record your results in the table. 

 time / s 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 

 temperature of the solution / °C 

## [2] 


**©UCLES 2017 0620/53/O/N/17 [Turn over** 

 (c) Plot your results for Experiments 1 and 2 on the grid. Draw two smooth line graphs. Clearly label your lines. 

## 0 20 40 60 

 time / s 

 temperature of the solution / °C 

## 80 100 

## 45 

## 40 

## 35 

## 30 

## 25 

## 20 

## 15 

## 10 

## 5 

## 0 

## [4] 

 (d) (i) From your graph , deduce the temperature of the solution in Experiment 1 after 15 seconds. Show clearly on the grid how you worked out your answer. 

## .............................. °C [2] 

 (ii) From your graph , deduce the time taken for the temperature of the solution in Experiment 2 to change by 6 °C from the initial temperature. Show clearly on the grid how you worked out your answer. 

 .............................. s [2] 


**(e)** Use your results to identify the type of energy change that occurs when solid **X** dissolves in water. 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

**(f)** Predict the temperature of the solution in Experiment 2 after 1 hour. Explain your answer. 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

**(g)** State **two** sources of error in these experiments. Give **one** improvement to reduce each of these sources of error. 

 source of error 1 ........................................................................................................................ 

 improvement 1 ........................................................................................................................... 

 source of error 2 ........................................................................................................................ 

 improvement 2 ........................................................................................................................... [4] 

**(h)** When carrying out the experiments, what would be a disadvantage of taking the temperature readings only every 30 seconds? 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

 [Total: 19] 


**©UCLES 2017 0620/53/O/N/17 [Turn over** 

 Question 2 starts on the next page. 


**2** You are provided with two solutions, **Y** and **Z**. Carry out the following tests on the solutions, recording all of your observations at each stage. 

 tests on solution Y 

 Divide the solution into two equal portions in two test-tubes. 

 (a) Describe the appearance of solution Y. 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

 (b) (i) Add a few drops of aqueous sodium hydroxide to the first portion of solution Y and shake the test-tube to mix the solutions. Record your observations. 

## ....................................................................................................................................... [2] 

 (ii) Now add an excess of aqueous sodium hydroxide to the mixture. Record your observations. 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [1] 

 (iii) Pour the mixture from (b)(ii) into a boiling tube and add a small piece of aluminium foil. Heat the mixture carefully. Test the gas produced with indicator paper. Record your observations. 

 ............................................................................................................................................. 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [2] 

 Keep the second portion of solution Y for the test in (e). 


**©UCLES 2017 0620/53/O/N/17 [Turn over** 

 tests on solution Z 

 Divide the solution into three equal portions in three test-tubes. 

 (c) Test the pH of the first portion of solution Z. Record your observations. 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

# (d) (i) Add a few drops of aqueous copper(II) sulfate to the second portion of solution Z. 

 Record your observations. 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [1] 

# (ii) Now add an excess of aqueous copper(II) sulfate to the mixture. 

 Record your observations. 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [2] 

 (e) To the third portion of solution Z , add the second portion of solution Y. Record your observations. 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [2] 

 (f) Identify solution Y. 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [2] 

 (g) Identify solution Z. 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

 [Total: 15] 


**3** Washing soda crystals are crystals of hydrated sodium carbonate, Na 2 CO3.10H 2 O. When exposed to the air, some of the water is lost from the crystals and a new substance is formed. This process occurs faster in hotter climates. 

 Plan an experiment to determine the percentage of water by mass present in the new substance. 

 You are provided with common laboratory apparatus. 

 ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ..................................................................................................................................................... [6] 

 [Total: 6] 


## BLANK PAGE 


## BLANK PAGE 


**Notes for use in qualitative analysis Tests for anions** 

 anion test test result 

 carbonate (CO 3 2–^ ) add dilute acid effervescence, carbon dioxide produced 

 chloride (C l –^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify with dilute nitric acid, then add aqueous silver nitrate 

 white ppt. 

 bromide (Br –^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify with dilute nitric acid, then add aqueous silver nitrate 

 cream ppt. 

 iodide (I–^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify with dilute nitric acid, then add aqueous silver nitrate 

 yellow ppt. 

 nitrate (NO 3 –^ ) [in solution] 

 add aqueous sodium hydroxide, then aluminium foil; warm carefully 

 ammonia produced 

 sulfate (SO 4 2–^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify, then add aqueous barium nitrate 

 white ppt. 

 sulfite (SO 3 2–^ ) add dilute hydrochloric acid, warm gently and test for the presence of sulfur dioxide 

 sulfur dioxide produced will turn acidified aqueous potassium 

# manganate(VII) from purple to 

 colourless 

**Tests for aqueous cations** 

 cation effect of aqueous sodium hydroxide effect of aqueous ammonia 

 aluminium (A l 3+^ ) white ppt., soluble in excess, giving a colourless solution 

 white ppt., insoluble in excess 

 ammonium (NH 4 +^ ) ammonia produced on warming – 

 calcium (Ca 2+^ ) white ppt., insoluble in excess no ppt., or very slight white ppt. 

# chromium(III) (Cr 3+^ ) green ppt., soluble in excess grey-green ppt., insoluble in excess 

# copper(II) (Cu 2+^ ) light blue ppt., insoluble in excess light blue ppt., soluble in excess, 

 giving a dark blue solution 

# iron(II) (Fe2+^ ) green ppt., insoluble in excess green ppt., insoluble in excess 

# iron(III) (Fe3+^ ) red-brown ppt., insoluble in excess red-brown ppt., insoluble in excess 

 zinc (Zn2+^ ) white ppt., soluble in excess, giving a colourless solution 

 white ppt., soluble in excess, giving a colourless solution 


 Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. E v ery reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

**o avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the C ambridge InternationalT Examinations C opyright A cknowledgements B ooklet. T his is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. Cambridge International E xaminations is part of the C ambridge A ssessment G roup. C ambridge A ssessment is the brand name of U niversity of C ambridge L ocal Examinations S yndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the U niversity of C ambridge.** 

 Tests for gases Flame tests for metal ions 

 gas test and test results metal ion flame colour 

 ammonia (NH 3 ) turns damp red litmus paper blue lithium (Li +) red 

 carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) turns limewater milky sodium (Na +) yellow 

chlorine (C _l_ (^) 2 ) bleaches damp litmus paper potassium (K+) lilac 

# hydrogen (H 2 ) ‘pops’ with a lighted splint copper(II) (Cu 2+^ ) blue-green 

 oxygen (O 2 ) relights a glowing splint 

 sulfur dioxide (SO 2 ) turns acidified aqueous 

# potassium manganate(VII) from 

 purple to colourless 


