 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. IB17 11_0620_11/4RP© UCLES 2017 [Turn over 

# *1330880521* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/11 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) October/November 2017 Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet^ 45 minutes Soft clean eraserSoft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil.Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unlessthis has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

There areanswers **A** (^) , **forty B** , **C** questions on this paper. Answerand **D**. **all** questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the **one** you consider correct and record your choice in **soft pencil** on the separate Answer Sheet. **Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully.** Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer.Any rough working should be done in this booklet. A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16.Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2017 0620/11/O/N/17 

**1** The diagram shows how the arrangement of particles changes when a substance changes state. 

 Which change of state is shown? A boiling B condensation C evaporation D sublimation 

**2** Which method can be used to separate a mixture of salt and water to obtain **both** parts of the mixture? **A** crystallisation **B** distillation **C** evaporation **D** filtration 

**3** A student put 25.0 cm^3 of dilute hydrochloric acid into a conical flask. The student added 2.5the mixture. g of solid sodium carbonate and measured the change in temperature of 

 Which apparatus does the student need to use to obtain the most accurate results? A balance, measuring cylinder, thermometer B balance, pipette, stopwatch C balance, pipette, thermometer D burette, pipette, thermometer 

**4** Propanone, C 3 H 6 O, is a liquid at room temperature. What is the boiling point of pure propanone? **A** –61 °C to –51 °C **B** –56 °C **C** 51 °C to 61 °C **D** 56 °C 


© UCLES 2017 0620/11/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**5** Which statement about the boxes P, Q and R is correct? P Q R 

 A Box P contains two compounds and box R contains two elements. B Box P contains two elements and box Q contains a mixture. C Box P contains two elements and box Q contains one compound. D Box Q contains two compounds and box R contains a mixture. 

**6** The number of particles in atoms W, X, Y and Z are shown. 

 protons electrons neutrons W 6 6 6 X 6 6 7 Y 7 7 7 Z 7 7 8 Which statement is correct? A W and X are isotopes of carbon. B X and Y are isotopes of nitrogen. C X has a mass number of 12. D Z has an atomic number of 8. 

**7** Which row describes the type of bonding present in substances 1 and 2? 

 substance 1 substance 2 A methane has ionic bonding graphite has covalent bonding B graphite has ionic bonding potassium chloride has covalent bonding C potassium chloride has ionic bonding methane has covalent bonding D potassium chloride has ionic bonding graphite has ionic bonding 


© UCLES 2017 0620/11/O/N/17 

**8** Substances with giant covalent structures can be used as lubricants and as cutting tools for hardmaterials. 

 The diagram shows how the atoms are arranged in two giant covalent substances, X and Y. X Y key strong covalent bond weak attraction Which statement is correct? A Only X is used as a cutting tool and only Y is used as a lubricant. B Only X is used as a lubricant and only Y is used as a cutting tool. C X and Y are both used as cutting tools. D X and Y are both used as lubricants. 

**9** The equation shows the thermal decomposition of magnesium carbonate ( _M_ r = 84). 

MgCO 3 → MgO + CO (^2) Which mass of magnesium oxide is formed when 21.0 g of magnesium carbonate are completely decomposed? **A** 1.9 g **B** 4.0 g **C** 10.0 g **D** 40.0 g 


© UCLES 2017 0620/11/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**10** Electricity is passed through concentrated aqueous sodium chloride. Inert electrodes are used. 

## + – 

 concentratedaqueous sodium chloride 

 What is formed at the negative electrode? A chlorine B hydrogen C oxygen D sodium 

**11** Two chemical processes are described. ● During the combustion of gasoline, energy is ......1....... ● During the electrolysis of sulfuric acid, energy is ......2....... Which words complete gaps 1 and 2? 1 2 **A** given out given out **B** given out taken in **C** taken in given out **D** taken in taken in 


© UCLES 2017 0620/11/O/N/17 

**12** When dilute sulfuric acid reacts with aqueous sodium hydroxide, the temperature of the solutionincreases. 

 Which words describe this reaction? A endothermic and neutralisation B endothermic and redox C exothermic and neutralisation D exothermic and redox 

**13** The mass of a beaker and its contents is plotted against time. Which graph represents what happens when sodium carbonate reacts with an excess of dilute hydrochloric acid in an open beaker? 

mass 

 time 

## A 

 mass 

 time 

## B 

 mass 

 time 

## C 

 mass 

 time 

## D 

(^00 00 00 00) 

# 14 When blue copper(II) sulfate is heated, a white solid and water are formed. 

 The white solid turns blue and gives out heat when water is added to it. 

# Which terms describe the blue copper(II) sulfate and the reactions? 

 the blue 

# copper(II) sulfate is reactions 

 A a mixture can be reversed B a mixture cannot be reversed C hydrated can be reversed D hydrated cannot be reversed 

**15** Whichhydrochloric acid? changes increase the rate of reaction between calcium carbonate and dilute 

 1 increasing the concentration of the acid 2 increasing the temperature 3 increasing the size of the pieces of calcium carbonate A 1, 2 and 3 B 1 and 2 only C 1 and 3 only D 2 and 3 only 


© UCLES 2017 0620/11/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**16** The equations for two reactions P and Q are given. P 2NaNO 2 + O 2 → 2NaNO 3 Q 2HgO → 2Hg + O 2 In which of these reactions does oxidation of the underlined substance occur? P Q **A**   **B**   **C**   **D**   

**17** What is **not** a typical characteristic of acids? **A** They react with alkalis producing water. **B** They react with **all** metals producing hydrogen. **C** They react with carbonates producing carbon dioxide. **D** They turn blue litmus paper red. 

**18** Magnesium, phosphorus and chlorine are elements in the same period of the Periodic Table. Which row describes the type of oxide formed by each of these elements? magnesium phosphorus chlorine **A** acidic acidic basic **B** acidic basic basic **C** basic acidic acidic **D** basic basic acidic 

**19** Zinc sulfate is made by reacting an excess of zinc oxide with dilute sulfuric acid. The excess zinc oxide is then removed from the solution. Which process is used to obtain solid zinc sulfate from the solution? **A** crystallisation **B** dissolving **C** filtration **D** fractional distillation 


© UCLES 2017 0620/11/O/N/17 

**20** What is used to test for chlorine? **A** a glowing splint **B** damp litmus paper **C** limewater 

# D potassium manganate(VII) solution 

**21** Which statements about the trends across a period of the Periodic Table are correct? 1 Aluminium is more metallic than sodium. 2 Beryllium is more metallic than carbon. 3 Boron is more metallic than lithium. 4 Magnesium is more metallic than silicon. **A** 1 and 2 **B** 1 and 3 **C** 2 and 4 **D** 3 and 4 

**22** Astatine is an element in Group VII of the Periodic Table. Astatine is ......1...... reactive than iodine. The melting point of astatine is ......2...... than the melting point of iodine. Astatine is ......3...... in colour than bromine. Which words complete gaps 1, 2 and 3? 1 2 3 **A** less higher darker **B** less lower lighter **C** more higher darker **D** more lower lighter 

**23** Which row describes the properties of a typical transition element? 

 melting point forms colouredcompounds can act asa catalyst A high no no B high yes yes C low no yes D low yes no 


© UCLES 2017 0620/11/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**24** Why is argon gas used to fill electric lamps? **A** It conducts electricity. **B** It glows when heated. **C** It is less dense than air. **D** It is not reactive. 

**25** What is a property of **all** metals? **A** conduct electricity **B** hard **C** low melting points **D** react with water 

**26** Which material is **not** involved in the large-scale extraction of iron from iron ore? **A** bauxite **B** calcium carbonate (limestone) **C** carbon (coke) **D** hematite 


© UCLES 2017 0620/11/O/N/17 

**27** Some reactions of three metals are listed in the table. 

 metal metal reacts with dilutehydrochloric acid reduced by carbonmetal oxide is P yes no Q no yes R yes yes What is the order of reactivity of the metals? most reactive 

 least reactive A P R Q B Q P R C R P Q D R Q P 

**28** Which uses of the metals shown are both correct? 

 aluminium stainless steel A aircraft bodies cutlery B car bodies aircraft bodies C chemical plant food containers D food containers car bodies 

**29** The flow chart shows stages in the treatment of river water to produce drinking water. 

 drinking water 

 stage Y 

 stage X 

 settling tank 

 river water What occurs at stages X and Y? X Y A distillation chlorination B distillation filtration C filtration chlorination D filtration distillation 


© UCLES 2017 0620/11/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**30** Which gas is over 30% of air? **A** argon **B** carbon dioxide **C** nitrogen **D** oxygen 

**31** Iron is a metal that rusts in the presence of oxygen and water. Mild steel is used for ......1...... and is prevented from rusting by ......2....... Stainless steel does not rust. It is produced by ......3...... iron with another metal. Which words complete gaps 1, 2 and 3? 1 2 3 **A** car bodies greasing covering **B** car bodies painting mixing **C** cutlery greasing covering **D** cutlery painting mixing 

**32** A mixture produces a gas both when it reacts with an acid and when it reacts with an alkali. Which ions are present in the mixture? **A** ammonium ions and carbonate ions **B** ammonium ions and oxide ions **C** hydrogen ions and carbonate ions **D** hydrogen ions and oxide ions 

**33** Some marble chips (calcium carbonate) are heated strongly and substances X and Y are formed. Substance X is a white solid that reacts with water, giving out heat. Substance Y is a colourless gas. What are substances X and Y? X Y **A** calcium chloride oxygen **B** calcium hydroxide carbon dioxide **C** calcium oxide carbon dioxide **D** calcium sulfate oxygen 


© UCLES 2017 0620/11/O/N/17 

**34** The structures of some organic molecules are shown. 

## C C 

CH (^3) 

## H 

## H 3 C 

## H 

## C 

CH (^3) H H 

## H 

## C 

H CH (^3) 

## C 

CH (^3) H H 

## H 

## C 

## H H 

## C 

CH (^3) H CH (^3) 

## H 

## C 

## H H 

## 1 2 3 4 

 Which structures represent an alkane with four carbon atoms? A 1 only B 2 and 3 C 2 and 4 D 3 and 4 

**35** Some of the fractions obtained from the fractional distillation of petroleum are used as fuels for vehicles. Which two fractions are used as fuels for vehicles? **A** bitumen fraction and gasoline fraction **B** bitumen fraction and naphtha fraction **C** gasoline fraction and kerosene fraction **D** kerosene fraction and lubricating fraction 

**36** Burning fossil fuels releases heat energy. Which substance is **not** a fossil fuel? **A** coal **B** hydrogen **C** natural gas **D** petroleum 

**37** X, Y and Z are three hydrocarbons. 

X CH 2 =CH 2 Y CH 3 –CH=CH 2 Z CH 3 –CH 2 –CH=CH (^2) What do compounds X, Y and Z have in common? 1 They are all alkenes. 2 They are all part of the same homologous series. 3 They all have the same boiling point. **A** 1, 2 and 3 **B** 1 and 2 only **C** 1 and 3 only **D** 2 and 3 only 


© UCLES 2017 0620/11/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**38** The table shows bonds that are present and bonds that are not present in compound X. 

 bond C–C  C=C  C–H  C–O  C=O  O–H  What type of compound is X? A a carboxylic acid B an alcohol C an alkane D an alkene 

**39** The diagram shows a reaction sequence. 

 butane ethene ethanol carbon dioxideand water 

## X Y Z 

 Which row names the processes X, Y and Z? X Y Z A cracking fermentation respiration B cracking hydration combustion C distillation fermentation respiration D distillation hydration combustion 


© UCLES 2017 0620/11/O/N/17 

**40** Molecules of a substance react together as shown. 

## H H 

## H H 

## C C 

## H H 

## H H 

## C C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H H 

## H H 

## + + C C 

 Which type of reaction has taken place? A cracking B oxidation C polymerisation D reduction 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeInternational Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge LocalExaminations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2017 0620/11/O/N/17 

## BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2017 0620/11/O/N/17 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements^1 Hhydrogen^1 

(^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Beberyllium 9 **Key** atomic numberatomic symbol name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mgmagnesium 24 19 Kpotassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Srstrontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Gegermanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 (^22) Tititanium (^4840) Zrzirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rfrutherfordium– 23 Vvanadium (^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Crchromium (^5242) Momolybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sgseaborgium– (^25) Mnmanganese (^5543) Tctechnetium– (^75) Rerhenium (^186107) Bhbohrium– (^26) Feiron (^5644) Ruruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Iriridium (^192109) Mtmeitnerium– (^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pdpalladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Dsdarmstadtium– (^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rgroentgenium– (^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cdcadmium (^11280) Hgmercury (^201112) Cncopernicium– 114 F _l_ flerovium– (^116) Lvlivermorium– (^7) Nnitrogen 1415 Pphosphorus (^3133) Asarsenic (^7551) Sbantimony 12283 Bibismuth 209 (^8) Ooxygen 1616 Ssulfur (^3234) Seselenium (^7952) Tetellurium (^12884) Popolonium– (^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Brbromine 8053 I iodine 12785 Atastatine– (^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Scscandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) Lalanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). actinium– (^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium^141 (^91) Paprotactinium 231 (^60) Ndneodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pmpromethium– (^93) Npneptunium– (^62) Smsamarium (^15094) Puplutonium– (^63) Eueuropium (^15295) Amamericium– (^64) Gdgadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bkberkelium– (^66) Dydysprosium 16398 Cfcalifornium– (^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Eseinsteinium– (^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Mdmendelevium– (^70) Ybytterbium (^173102) Nonobelium– (^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lrlawrencium– 


