 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 16 printed pages. IB17 11_0620_13/4RP© UCLES 2017 [Turn over 

# *5136071969* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/13 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) October/November 2017 Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet^ 45 minutes Soft clean eraserSoft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil.Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unlessthis has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

There areanswers **A** (^) , **forty B** , **C** questions on this paper. Answerand **D**. **all** questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the **one** you consider correct and record your choice in **soft pencil** on the separate Answer Sheet. **Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully.** Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer.Any rough working should be done in this booklet. A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16.Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2017 0620/13/O/N/17 

**1** Which statement about liquids and gases is correct? **A** 1 cm^3 of gas contains more particles than 1 cm^3 of liquid. **B** A given mass of liquid has a fixed volume at room temperature. **C** Particles in a liquid can easily be forced closer together. **D** Particles in a liquid have fixed positions. 

# 2 Which method is used to obtain copper(II) sulfate crystals from an aqueous solution of 

# copper(II) sulfate? 

 A chromatography B condensation C evaporation D filtration 

**3** 25 cm^3 of an alkali are added to 20 cm^3 of an acid. The temperature change is measured. Which apparatus is **not** needed in the experiment? **A** 25 cm^3 measuring cylinder **B** 100 cm^3 beaker **C** balance **D** thermometer 

# 4 A sample of liquid X turns blue cobalt(II) chloride paper pink. The sample boils at 102 °C. 

 Which statements are correct? 1 X contains water. 2 X is impure water. 3 X freezes above 0 °C. A 1, 2 and 3 B 1 and 2 only C 1 and 3 only D 2 and 3 only 


© UCLES 2017 0620/13/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**5** Substance Y is added to an excess of hot water. A blue solution forms and a brown solid remains. The brown solid is filtered off and dried. The brown solid conducts electricity. What is Y? **A** a compound which contains a metal **B** a mixture which contains a metal **C** a pure substance which is a metal **D** a pure substance which is a non-metal 

**6** Which row gives the number of protons, electrons and neutrons found in an atom of zinc? 

 protons electrons neutrons A 30 30 35 B 30 35 35 C 35 30 30 D 35 35 30 

**7** Four statements about atoms and ions are shown. 1 F –^ has more electrons than Na +. 2 Mg 2+^ has the same number of electrons as Na +. 3 Na +^ has more electrons than Li +. 4 An atom of P has more outer shell electrons than an atom of N. Which statements are correct? **A** 1 and 2 **B** 1 and 4 **C** 2 and 3 **D** 3 and 4 


© UCLES 2017 0620/13/O/N/17 

**8** The diagrams, X, Y and Z, show part of a polymer and two giant covalent structures. X Y Z 

 Which of X, Y or Z could be used as a cutting tool and which of X, Y or Z could be used to reduce friction? cutting tool reduce friction A X Y B Y Z C Z X D Z Y 

**9** A compound with the formula XO 2 has a relative formula mass of 64. What is X? **A** cadmium **B** copper **C** gadolinium **D** sulfur 


© UCLES 2017 0620/13/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**10** The electrolysis of concentrated hydrochloric acid using platinum electrodes is shown. 

 concentrated hydrochloric acid 

## + – 

 What is observed at each electrode at the start of the electrolysis? positive electrode negative electrode A colourless gas colourless gas B colourless gas green gas C green gas colourless gas D green gas green gas 

**11** Two chemical processes are described. ● During the combustion of kerosene, energy is ......1....... ● During the electrolysis of hydrochloric acid, energy is ......2....... Which words complete gaps 1 and 2? 1 2 **A** given out given out **B** given out taken in **C** taken in given out **D** taken in taken in 

**12** Which reaction is endothermic? **A** neutralisation of an acid by an alkali **B** reaction of hydrogen with oxygen **C** reaction of sodium with water **D** thermal decomposition of limestone 


© UCLES 2017 0620/13/O/N/17 

**13** The mass of a beaker and its contents is plotted against time. Which graph represents what happens when sodium carbonate reacts with an excess of dilute hydrochloric acid in an open beaker? 

mass 

 time 

## A 

 mass 

 time 

## B 

 mass 

 time 

## C 

 mass 

 time 

## D 

(^00 00 00 00) 

# 14 When blue copper(II) sulfate is heated, a white solid and water are formed. 

 The white solid turns blue and gives out heat when water is added to it. 

# Which terms describe the blue copper(II) sulfate and the reactions? 

 the blue 

# copper(II) sulfate is reactions 

 A a mixture can be reversed B a mixture cannot be reversed C hydrated can be reversed D hydrated cannot be reversed 


© UCLES 2017 0620/13/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**15** The equation for the reaction between magnesium and hydrochloric acid is shown. 

Mg + 2HC _l_ → MgC _l_ (^) 2 + H 2 The rate of this reaction is studied using the apparatus shown. hydrochloric acid magnesium ribbon gas syringe Which change increases the rate of reaction? **A** lowering the temperature of the acid **B** using a larger volume of the same hydrochloric acid **C** using less concentrated hydrochloric acid **D** using the same mass of magnesium powder **16** The equations for two reactions P and Q are given. P 2NaNO 2 + O 2 → 2NaNO 3 Q 2HgO → 2Hg + O 2 In which of these reactions does oxidation of the underlined substance occur? P Q **A**   **B**   **C**   **D**   **17** What is **not** a typical characteristic of acids? **A** They react with alkalis producing water. **B** They react with **all** metals producing hydrogen. **C** They react with carbonates producing carbon dioxide. **D** They turn blue litmus paper red. 


© UCLES 2017 0620/13/O/N/17 

**18** Which oxide produces a solution with a pH between pH 1 and pH 7 when reacted with water? **A** calcium oxide **B** carbon dioxide **C** potassium oxide **D** sodium oxide 

**19** Three solids, P, Q and R, all react with dilute sulfuric acid to produce zinc sulfate. P and R produce gases during the reaction. The gas produced when P reacts will not burn. The gas produced when R reacts will burn. What are P, Q and R? P Q R **A** zinc zinc hydroxide zinc carbonate **B** zinc carbonate zinc zinc oxide **C** zinc carbonate zinc hydroxide zinc **D** zinc oxide zinc carbonate zinc 

**20** Which ion forms a green precipitate with aqueous sodium hydroxide that dissolves in an excess of aqueous sodium hydroxide? **A** Ca 2+^ **B** Cr 3+^ **C** Cu 2+^ **D** Fe 2+ 

**21** A period of the Periodic Table is shown. 

 group I II III IV V VI VII VIII element R S T V W X Y Z The letters are not their chemical symbols. Which statement is correct? A Element R does not conduct electricity. B Elements R and Y react together to form an ionic compound. C Element Z exists as a diatomic molecule. D Element Z reacts with element T. 


© UCLES 2017 0620/13/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**22** Some properties of element X are shown. 

 melting point in °C 98 boiling point in °C 883 reaction with cold water gives off H 2 gas reaction when heated with oxygen burns to give a white solid In which part of the Periodic Table is X found? A Group I B Group VII C Group VIII D transition elements 

**23** The table gives some properties of an element. 

 melting point in °C 3422 appearance of the element grey appearance of the chloride of the element dark blue density in g / cm^3 19.2 electrical conductivity when solid good Which other property would you expect this element to have? A acts as a catalyst B brittle C forms an acidic oxide D highly reactive with water 

**24** Why is argon gas used to fill electric lamps? **A** It conducts electricity. **B** It glows when heated. **C** It is less dense than air. **D** It is not reactive. 


© UCLES 2017 0620/13/O/N/17 

**25** What is a property of **all** metals? **A** conduct electricity **B** hard **C** low melting points **D** react with water 

**26** What is the reducing agent in the large-scale extraction of iron from iron ore? **A** air **B** carbon monoxide **C** hematite **D** limestone 

**27** Some reactions of three metals are listed in the table. 

 metal metal reacts with dilutehydrochloric acid metal oxide is reducedby carbon P yes no Q yes yes R no yes What is the order of reactivity of the metals? most reactive 

 least reactive A P Q R B P R Q C Q P R D R P Q 

**28** Which uses of the metals shown are both correct? 

 aluminium stainless steel A aircraft bodies car bodies B car bodies aircraft bodies C chemical plant food containers D food containers cutlery 


© UCLES 2017 0620/13/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**29** The flow chart shows stages in the treatment of river water to produce drinking water. 

 drinking water 

 stage Y 

 stage X 

 settling tank 

 river water What occurs at stages X and Y? X Y A distillation chlorination B distillation filtration C filtration chlorination D filtration distillation 

**30** What is produced by the incomplete combustion of methane? **A** carbon monoxide **B** hydrogen **C** lead compounds **D** sulfur dioxide 

**31** Iron is a metal that rusts in the presence of oxygen and water. Mild steel is used for ......1...... and is prevented from rusting by ......2....... Stainless steel does not rust. It is produced by ......3...... iron with another metal. Which words complete gaps 1, 2 and 3? 1 2 3 **A** car bodies greasing covering **B** car bodies painting mixing **C** cutlery greasing covering **D** cutlery painting mixing 


© UCLES 2017 0620/13/O/N/17 

**32** Compound Q is heated with aqueous sodium hydroxide. damp red litmus paper 

 Q and aqueous sodium hydroxide heat The damp red litmus paper turns blue. What is Q? A ammonium chloride 

# B copper(II) chloride 

# C iron(III) chloride 

 D sodium chloride 

**33** Some marble chips (calcium carbonate) are heated strongly and substances X and Y are formed. Substance X is a white solid that reacts with water, giving out heat. Substance Y is a colourless gas. What are substances X and Y? X Y **A** calcium chloride oxygen **B** calcium hydroxide carbon dioxide **C** calcium oxide carbon dioxide **D** calcium sulfate oxygen 


© UCLES 2017 0620/13/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**34** The structure of compound R is shown. 

 H C C OH 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

 What is R? A propane B propanoic acid C propanol D propene 

**35** Fuel oil and naphtha are two fractions obtained from petroleum. What are the major uses of these fractions? fuel oil naphtha **A** jet fuel making chemicals **B** jet fuel making roads **C** ship fuel making chemicals **D** ship fuel making roads 

**36** What are the products of the complete combustion of ethanol? **A** CO + H 2 **B** CO + H 2 O **C** CO 2 + H 2 **D** CO 2 + H 2 O 

**37** X, Y and Z are three hydrocarbons. 

X CH 2 =CH 2 Y CH 3 –CH=CH 2 Z CH 3 –CH 2 –CH=CH (^2) What do compounds X, Y and Z have in common? 1 They are all alkenes. 2 They are all part of the same homologous series. 3 They all have the same boiling point. **A** 1, 2 and 3 **B** 1 and 2 only **C** 1 and 3 only **D** 2 and 3 only 


© UCLES 2017 0620/13/O/N/17 

**38** The table shows bonds that are present and bonds that are not present in compound X. 

 bond C–C  C=C  C–H  C–O  C=O  O–H  What type of compound is X? A a carboxylic acid B an alcohol C an alkane D an alkene 

**39** The diagram shows a reaction sequence. 

 butane ethene ethanol carbon dioxideand water 

## X Y Z 

 Which row names the processes X, Y and Z? X Y Z A cracking fermentation respiration B cracking hydration combustion C distillation fermentation respiration D distillation hydration combustion 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeInternational Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge LocalExaminations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2017 0620/13/O/N/17 

**40** Molecules of a substance react together as shown. 

## H H 

## H H 

## C C 

## H H 

## H H 

## C C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H H 

## H H 

## + + C C 

 Which type of reaction has taken place? A cracking B oxidation C polymerisation D reduction 


© UCLES 2017 0620/13/O/N/17 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements^1 Hhydrogen^1 

(^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Beberyllium 9 **Key** atomic numberatomic symbol name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mgmagnesium 24 19 Kpotassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Srstrontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Gegermanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 (^22) Tititanium (^4840) Zrzirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rfrutherfordium– 23 Vvanadium (^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Crchromium (^5242) Momolybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sgseaborgium– (^25) Mnmanganese (^5543) Tctechnetium– (^75) Rerhenium (^186107) Bhbohrium– (^26) Feiron (^5644) Ruruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Iriridium (^192109) Mtmeitnerium– (^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pdpalladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Dsdarmstadtium– (^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rgroentgenium– (^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cdcadmium (^11280) Hgmercury (^201112) Cncopernicium– 114 F _l_ flerovium– (^116) Lvlivermorium– (^7) Nnitrogen 1415 Pphosphorus (^3133) Asarsenic (^7551) Sbantimony 12283 Bibismuth 209 (^8) Ooxygen 1616 Ssulfur (^3234) Seselenium (^7952) Tetellurium (^12884) Popolonium– (^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Brbromine 8053 I iodine 12785 Atastatine– (^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Scscandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) Lalanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). actinium– (^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium^141 (^91) Paprotactinium 231 (^60) Ndneodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pmpromethium– (^93) Npneptunium– (^62) Smsamarium (^15094) Puplutonium– (^63) Eueuropium (^15295) Amamericium– (^64) Gdgadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bkberkelium– (^66) Dydysprosium 16398 Cfcalifornium– (^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Eseinsteinium– (^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Mdmendelevium– (^70) Ybytterbium (^173102) Nonobelium– (^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lrlawrencium– 


