 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. IB17 11_0620_21/3RP© UCLES 2017 [Turn over 

## *1790619835* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

### CHEMISTRY 0620/21 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) October/November 2017 Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet^ 45 minutes Soft clean eraserSoft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil.Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unlessthis has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

There areanswers **A** (^) , **forty B** , **C** questions on this paper. Answerand **D**. **all** questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the **one** you consider correct and record your choice in **soft pencil** on the separate Answer Sheet. **Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully.** Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer.Any rough working should be done in this booklet. A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16.Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2017 0620/21/O/N/17 

**1** Which process causes the greatest increase in the distance between particles? **A** condensation **B** freezing **C** melting **D** sublimation 

**2** A student put 25.0 cm^3 of dilute hydrochloric acid into a conical flask. The student added 2.5 g of solid sodium carbonate and measured the change in temperature of the mixture. Which apparatus does the student need to use to obtain the most accurate results? **A** balance, measuring cylinder, thermometer **B** balance, pipette, stopwatch **C** balance, pipette, thermometer **D** burette, pipette, thermometer 

**3** The results obtained from a chromatogram are shown. 

 distance travelled / cm solvent 5.0 substance X 3.0 substance Y 2.5 Which row gives the R f values of substance X and substance Y? R f (X) R f (Y) A 0.5 0.6 B 0.6 0.5 C 1.6 2.0 D 2.0 1.6 


© UCLES 2017 0620/21/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

## 4 Two statements about silicon(IV) oxide are given. 

 1 It is a hard substance. 2 It has a macromolecular structure with strong covalent bonds. Which is correct? A Both statements are correct and statement 2 explains statement 1. B Both statements are correct but statement 2 does not explain statement 1. C Statement 1 is correct but statement 2 is not correct. D Statement 2 is correct but statement 1 is not correct. 

**5** Which statement explains why isotopes of the same element have the same chemical properties? **A** They have a different number of neutrons in the nucleus. **B** They have the same number of neutrons in the nucleus. **C** They have the same number of outer shell electrons. **D** They have the same number of protons as neutrons. 

**6** Which dot-and-cross diagram shows the outer shell electron arrangement in a molecule of nitrogen? 

# N 

### A 

# N N 

### B 

# N N 

### C 

# N N 

### D 

# N 

**7** The equation for the reaction between barium chloride solution and dilute sulfuric acid is shown. 

BaC _l_ (^) 2 + H 2 SO 4 → BaSO 4 + 2HC _l_ Which row shows the state symbols for this equation? BaC _l_ (^) 2 H 2 SO 4 BaSO 4 2HC _l_ **A** (aq) (aq) (s) (aq) **B** (aq) (l) (s) (aq) **C** (l) (aq) (s) (l) **D** (aq) (l) (aq) (l) 


© UCLES 2017 0620/21/O/N/17 

**8** A compound is analysed and found to contain 85.7% carbon and 14.3% hydrogen. What is its empirical formula? **A** CH **B** CH 2 **C** C 2 H 4 **D** C 6 H 

## 9 Which statements about the electrolysis of concentrated copper(II) chloride are correct? 

## 1 Electrons are transferred from the cathode to the copper(II) ions. 

 2 Electrons move round the external circuit from the cathode to the anode. 3 Chloride ions are attracted to the anode. 4 Hydroxide ions transfer electrons to the cathode. A 1 and 3 B 1 and 4 C 2 and 3 D 2 and 4 

**10** Which metal combination produces the highest voltage reading in the cells shown? 

 V 

### A 

 Fe Cu 

### V 

### B 

 Zn Cu 

### V 

### C 

 Cu Cu 

### V 

### D 

 Mg Cu 


© UCLES 2017 0620/21/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**11** The compound hydrazine is used as a rocket fuel. It has the structural formula shown. 

 N 

### H 

### H 

### H 

### H 

### N 

 One of the reactions of hydrazine is shown. This reaction is exothermic. N 2 H 4 → N 2 + 2H 2 The bond energies are shown in the table. bond energy in kJ / mol H–H +436 N–H +390 N–N +160 N≡N +945 What is the energy change for this reaction? A –339 kJ / mol B –97 kJ / mol C +97 kJ / mol D +339 kJ / mol 

**12** Which statement describes an exothermic reaction? **A** The energy absorbed for bond breaking is greater than the energy released by bondformation. **B** The energy absorbed for bond breaking is less than the energy released by bond formation. **C** The energy released by bond breaking is greater than the energy absorbed for bondformation. **D** The energy released by bond breaking is less than the energy absorbed for bond formation. 

**13** The mass of a beaker and its contents is plotted against time. Which graph represents what happens when sodium carbonate reacts with an excess of dilute hydrochloric acid in an open beaker? 

mass 

 time 

### A 

 mass 

 time 

### B 

 mass 

 time 

### C 

 mass 

 time 

### D 

(^00 00 00 00) 


© UCLES 2017 0620/21/O/N/17 

## 14 Copper(II) oxide reacts with hydrogen. 

 CuO + H 2 → Cu + H 2 O Which row is correct? oxidising agent reducing agent A H 2 CuO B CuO H 2 C H 2 O Cu D Cu H 2 O 

**15** Ethanoic acid reacts slowly with calcium carbonate. Which statements explain why an increase in temperature increases the rate of the reaction? 1 The activation energy of the reaction is decreased. 2 There is an increase in collision rate. 3 The particles have more energy. 4 There will be fewer successful collisions. **A** 1 and 2 **B** 1 and 3 **C** 2 and 3 **D** 2 and 4 

**16** Methane reacts with steam to produce hydrogen and carbon monoxide. The equation for the reaction is shown. CH 4 (g) + H 2 O(g) 3H 2 (g) + CO(g) The reaction is reversible. The forward reaction is endothermic. Which changes in temperature and pressure increase the equilibrium yield of carbon monoxide? temperature pressure **A** decrease decrease **B** decrease increase **C** increase decrease **D** increase increase 


© UCLES 2017 0620/21/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**17** Some properties of four oxides are listed. Oxide 1 reacts with both acids and alkalis to form salts. Oxide 2 reacts with acids to form salts but does not react with alkalis. Oxide 3 reacts with alkalis to form salts but does not react with acids. Oxide 4 does not react with acids or alkalis. Which row describes the oxides? oxide 1 oxide 2 oxide 3 oxide 4 **A** amphoteric acidic basic neutral **B** amphoteric basic acidic neutral **C** neutral acidic basic amphoteric **D** neutral basic acidic amphoteric 

**18** What is **not** a typical characteristic of acids? **A** They react with alkalis producing water. **B** They react with **all** metals producing hydrogen. **C** They react with carbonates producing carbon dioxide. **D** They turn blue litmus paper red. 

**19** Zinc sulfate is made by reacting an excess of zinc oxide with dilute sulfuric acid. The excess zinc oxide is then removed from the solution. Which process is used to obtain solid zinc sulfate from the solution? **A** crystallisation **B** dissolving **C** filtration **D** fractional distillation 

**20** What is used to test for chlorine? **A** a glowing splint **B** damp litmus paper **C** limewater 

## D potassium manganate(VII) solution 


© UCLES 2017 0620/21/O/N/17 

**21** Which statements about the trends across a period of the Periodic Table are correct? 1 Aluminium is more metallic than sodium. 2 Beryllium is more metallic than carbon. 3 Boron is more metallic than lithium. 4 Magnesium is more metallic than silicon. **A** 1 and 2 **B** 1 and 3 **C** 2 and 4 **D** 3 and 4 

**22** Astatine is an element in Group VII of the Periodic Table. Astatine is ......1...... reactive than iodine. The melting point of astatine is ......2...... than the melting point of iodine. Astatine is ......3...... in colour than bromine. Which words complete gaps 1, 2 and 3? 1 2 3 **A** less higher darker **B** less lower lighter **C** more higher darker **D** more lower lighter 

**23** Which row describes the properties of a typical transition element? 

 melting point forms colouredcompounds can act asa catalyst A high no no B high yes yes C low no yes D low yes no 

**24** Why is argon gas used to fill electric lamps? **A** It conducts electricity. **B** It glows when heated. **C** It is less dense than air. **D** It is not reactive. 


© UCLES 2017 0620/21/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**25** What is a property of **all** metals? **A** conduct electricity **B** hard **C** low melting points **D** react with water 

**26** Aluminium is extracted by the electrolysis of aluminium oxide. Which statement is **not** correct? **A** Aluminium ions are oxidised at the cathode. **B** Carbon dioxide is made at the anode. **C** Cryolite is added to lower the melting point of the aluminium oxide. **D** The electrodes are made from graphite. 

**27** Which row describes how the metals are used? 

 mixed with zinc to form brass 

 used to galvanise iron A aluminium tin B aluminium zinc C copper tin D copper zinc 


© UCLES 2017 0620/21/O/N/17 

**28** Information about the nitrates and carbonates of two metals, Q and R, is shown. 

 appearance solubility in water effect of heat nitrate of Q white solid soluble colourless gas evolved which relights a glowing splint carbonate of Q white solid soluble no reaction nitrate of R white solid soluble brown gas evolved carbonate of R white solid insoluble colourless gas evolved which turns limewater milky Which statement is correct? A Q is calcium and R is magnesium. B Q is magnesium and R is sodium. C Q is potassium and R is copper. D Q is sodium and R is calcium. 

**29** The flow chart shows stages in the treatment of river water to produce drinking water. 

 drinking water 

 stage Y 

 stage X 

 settling tank 

 river water What occurs at stages X and Y? X Y A distillation chlorination B distillation filtration C filtration chlorination D filtration distillation 


© UCLES 2017 0620/21/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**30** Four iron nails had different metals wrapped around them. The nails were placed in an open dish filled with water and left for a week. Which iron nail has no protection against rusting? **A** wrapped in aluminium 

### B 

 wrapped in copper 

### D 

 wrapped in zinc 

### C 

 wrapped in magnesium 

**31** Ammonia is made by the Haber process. N 2 + 3H 2 2NH 3 What are the sources of the nitrogen and hydrogen used in the Haber process? nitrogen hydrogen **A** fertilisers reacting methane with steam **B** fertilisers the air **C** the air reacting methane with steam **D** the air the air 

**32** Which process does **not** produce carbon dioxide? **A** combustion of alkanes **B** photosynthesis **C** respiration **D** thermal decomposition of limestone 


© UCLES 2017 0620/21/O/N/17 

**33** Which row shows the conditions used in the manufacture of sulfuric acid by the Contact process? 

 temperature / °C 

 pressure/ atm catalyst A 40 200 Fe B 40 200 V 2 O 5 C 400 2 Fe D 400 2 V 2 O 5 

**34** Some marble chips (calcium carbonate) are heated strongly and substances X and Y are formed. Substance X is a white solid that reacts with water, giving out heat. Substance Y is a colourless gas. What are substances X and Y? X Y **A** calcium chloride oxygen **B** calcium hydroxide carbon dioxide **C** calcium oxide carbon dioxide **D** calcium sulfate oxygen 

**35** The structures of some organic molecules are shown. 

### C C 

CH (^3) 

### H 

### H 3 C 

### H 

### C 

CH (^3) H H 

### H 

### C 

H CH (^3) 

### C 

CH (^3) H H 

### H 

### C 

### H H 

### C 

CH (^3) H CH (^3) 

### H 

### C 

### H H 

### 1 2 3 4 

 Which structures represent an alkane with four carbon atoms? A 1 only B 2 and 3 C 2 and 4 D 3 and 4 


© UCLES 2017 0620/21/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**36** Some of the fractions obtained from the fractional distillation of petroleum are used as fuels forvehicles. 

 Which two fractions are used as fuels for vehicles? A bitumen fraction and gasoline fraction B bitumen fraction and naphtha fraction C gasoline fraction and kerosene fraction D kerosene fraction and lubricating fraction 

**37** X, Y and Z are three hydrocarbons. 

X CH 2 =CH 2 Y CH 3 –CH=CH 2 Z CH 3 –CH 2 –CH=CH (^2) What do compounds X, Y and Z have in common? 1 They are all alkenes. 2 They are all part of the same homologous series. 3 They all have the same boiling point. **A** 1, 2 and 3 **B** 1 and 2 only **C** 1 and 3 only **D** 2 and 3 only **38** The diagram shows a reaction sequence. butane ethene ethanol carbon dioxideand water 

### X Y Z 

 Which row names the processes X, Y and Z? X Y Z A cracking fermentation respiration B cracking hydration combustion C distillation fermentation respiration D distillation hydration combustion 

**39** Which pair of compounds can be used to prepare CH 3 CH 2 COOCH 2 CH 3? **A** ethanoic acid and ethanol **B** ethanoic acid and propanol **C** propanoic acid and ethanol **D** propanoic acid and propanol 


© UCLES 2017 0620/21/O/N/17 

**40** The structure of a synthetic polymer is shown. 

 C 

### O 

### C 

### O 

### C C 

### O O 

### N 

### H 

### N 

### H 

### N 

### H 

### N 

### H 

### C 

### O 

 The structure shows that it is a ......1....... It is formed by ......2...... polymerisation. Which words complete gaps 1 and 2? 1 2 A polyamide addition B polyamide condensation C polyester addition D polyester condensation 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeInternational Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge LocalExaminations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2017 0620/21/O/N/17 

### BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2017 0620/21/O/N/17 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements^1 Hhydrogen^1 

(^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Beberyllium 9 **Key** atomic numberatomic symbol name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mgmagnesium 24 19 Kpotassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Srstrontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Gegermanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 (^22) Tititanium (^4840) Zrzirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rfrutherfordium– 23 Vvanadium (^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Crchromium (^5242) Momolybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sgseaborgium– (^25) Mnmanganese (^5543) Tctechnetium– (^75) Rerhenium (^186107) Bhbohrium– (^26) Feiron (^5644) Ruruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Iriridium (^192109) Mtmeitnerium– (^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pdpalladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Dsdarmstadtium– (^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rgroentgenium– (^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cdcadmium (^11280) Hgmercury (^201112) Cncopernicium– 114 F _l_ flerovium– (^116) Lvlivermorium– (^7) Nnitrogen 1415 Pphosphorus (^3133) Asarsenic (^7551) Sbantimony 12283 Bibismuth 209 (^8) Ooxygen 1616 Ssulfur (^3234) Seselenium (^7952) Tetellurium (^12884) Popolonium– (^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Brbromine 8053 I iodine 12785 Atastatine– (^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Scscandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) Lalanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). actinium– (^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium^141 (^91) Paprotactinium 231 (^60) Ndneodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pmpromethium– (^93) Npneptunium– (^62) Smsamarium (^15094) Puplutonium– (^63) Eueuropium (^15295) Amamericium– (^64) Gdgadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bkberkelium– (^66) Dydysprosium 16398 Cfcalifornium– (^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Eseinsteinium– (^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Mdmendelevium– (^70) Ybytterbium (^173102) Nonobelium– (^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lrlawrencium– 


