 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 14 printed pages and 2 blank pages. IB17 11_0620_22/3RP© UCLES 2017 [Turn over 

# *4951844726* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/22 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) October/November 2017 Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet^ 45 minutes Soft clean eraserSoft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil.Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unlessthis has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

There areanswers **A** (^) , **forty B** , **C** questions on this paper. Answerand **D**. **all** questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the **one** you consider correct and record your choice in **soft pencil** on the separate Answer Sheet. **Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully.** Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer.Any rough working should be done in this booklet. A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16.Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2017 0620/22/O/N/17 

**1** The diagram shows the arrangement of particles in the three states of matter. 

## P Q R 

 Solid carbon dioxide (dry ice) sublimes to gaseous carbon dioxide. Which row describes the initial and final states? initial state 

 final state A P R B Q P C R P D R Q 

**2** During an experiment a measurement is recorded in cm 3. Which apparatus is used? **A** balance **B** measuring cylinder **C** stopclock **D** thermometer 

**3** A student carried out paper chromatography on a mixture of amino acids. The student sprayed the dried chromatogram with a locating agent. What is the function of the locating agent? **A** to dissolve the amino acids **B** to form coloured spots with the amino acids **C** to preserve the amino acids **D** to stop the amino acids reacting 


© UCLES 2017 0620/22/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

# 4 Which row describes silicon(IV) oxide? 

 has a giant structure 

 is an acidic oxide 

 conducts electricity A    B    C    D    

**5** Why do isotopes of the same element have the same chemical properties? **A** They have the same nucleon number. **B** They have the same number of electrons in the outer shell. **C** They have the same number of neutrons in the nucleus. **D** They have the same number of protons as neutrons. 

**6** Which dot-and-cross diagram shows the outer shell electron arrangement in a molecule of carbon dioxide? 

## O C 

## A 

## O O C 

## B 

## O 

## O C 

## C 

## O O C 

## D 

## O 


© UCLES 2017 0620/22/O/N/17 

**7** The equation for the reaction between phosphorus and oxygen is shown. _x_ P 4 + _y_ O 2 → _z_ P 2 O 5 Which values of _x_ , _y_ and _z_ balance the equation? _x y z_ **A** 1 5 2 **B** 1 10 2 **C** 2 5 2 **D** 2 10 1 

**8** The relative molecular mass of an alcohol is 88. Its percentage composition by mass is: C, 54.5%; H, 9.1%; O, 36.4%. Which row shows the empirical formula and molecular formula for this alcohol? empirical formula molecular formula **A** C 2 H 4 O C 2 H 4 O **B** C 2 H 4 O C 4 H 8 O 2 **C** C 4 H 8 O 2 C 4 H 8 O 2 **D** C 4 H 8 O 2 C 2 H 4 O 

# 9 Which statements about the electrolysis of concentrated copper(II) chloride are correct? 

# 1 Electrons are transferred from the cathode to the copper(II) ions. 

 2 Electrons move round the external circuit from the cathode to the anode. 3 Chloride ions are attracted to the anode. 4 Hydroxide ions transfer electrons to the cathode. A 1 and 3 B 1 and 4 C 2 and 3 D 2 and 4 


© UCLES 2017 0620/22/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**10** Which metal combination produces the highest voltage reading in the cells shown? 

 V 

## A 

 Fe Cu 

## V 

## B 

 Zn Cu 

## V 

## C 

 Cu Cu 

## V 

## D 

 Mg Cu 

**11** The equation for the combustion of methane is shown. CH 4 + 2O 2 → CO 2 + 2H 2 O The energy change for the combustion of methane is –890 kJ / mol. The bond energies are shown in the table. bond bond energyin kJ / mol C–H +410 O=O +496 H–O +460 What is the bond energy of the C=O bond? **A** +49 kJ / mol **B** +841 kJ / mol **C** +1301 kJ / mol **D** +1335 kJ / mol 


© UCLES 2017 0620/22/O/N/17 

**12** Which statement describes an exothermic reaction? **A** The energy absorbed for bond breaking is greater than the energy released by bond formation. **B** The energy absorbed for bond breaking is less than the energy released by bond formation. **C** The energy released by bond breaking is greater than the energy absorbed for bond formation. **D** The energy released by bond breaking is less than the energy absorbed for bond formation. 

**13** The mass of a beaker and its contents is plotted against time. Which graph represents what happens when sodium carbonate reacts with an excess of dilutehydrochloric acid in an open beaker? 

mass 

 time 

## A 

 mass 

 time 

## B 

 mass 

 time 

## C 

 mass 

 time 

## D 

(^00 00 00 00) **14** Copper metal donates electrons to silver ions. Zinc metal donates electrons to copper ions. What is the strongest reducing agent? **A** copper ions **B** copper metal **C** silver ions **D** zinc metal **15** Four statements about the effect of increasing temperature on a reaction are shown. 1 The activation energy becomes lower. 2 The particles move faster. 3 There are more collisions between reacting particles. 4 There are more collisions which have energy greater than the activation energy. Which statements are correct? **A** 1, 2 and 3 **B** 1, 3 and 4 **C** 2, 3 and 4 **D** 2 and 3 only 


© UCLES 2017 0620/22/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**16** The formation of sulfur trioxide from sulfur dioxide is a reversible reaction. 2SO 2 (g) + O 2 (g) 2SO 3 (g) The forward reaction is exothermic. Which changes would increase the equilibrium yield of SO 3? 1 increasing the pressure 2 lowering the temperature 3 decreasing the concentration of oxygen **A** 1, 2 and 3 **B** 1 and 2 only **C** 1 only **D** 2 and 3 only 

**17** Some properties of four oxides are listed. Oxide 1 reacts with both acids and alkalis to form salts. Oxide 2 reacts with acids to form salts but does not react with alkalis. Oxide 3 reacts with alkalis to form salts but does not react with acids. Oxide 4 does not react with acids or alkalis. Which row describes the oxides? oxide 1 oxide 2 oxide 3 oxide 4 **A** amphoteric acidic basic neutral **B** amphoteric basic acidic neutral **C** neutral acidic basic amphoteric **D** neutral basic acidic amphoteric 

**18** What is **not** a typical characteristic of acids? **A** They react with alkalis producing water. **B** They react with **all** metals producing hydrogen. **C** They react with carbonates producing carbon dioxide. **D** They turn blue litmus paper red. 


© UCLES 2017 0620/22/O/N/17 

# 19 Copper(II) sulfate can be prepared by adding excess copper(II) carbonate to sulfuric acid. 

# Why is an excess of copper(II) carbonate added? 

# A to ensure all the copper(II) carbonate has reacted 

 B to ensure all the sulfuric acid has reacted C to increase the rate of reaction 

# D to increase the yield of copper(II) sulfate 

**20** Compound P reacts with hydrochloric acid to produce a gas that turns limewater milky. What is P? **A** sodium carbonate **B** sodium chloride **C** sodium hydroxide **D** sodium sulfate 

**21** Which statement about nitrogen and phosphorus is **not** correct? **A** Both are in the same group of the Periodic Table. **B** Both are in the same period of the Periodic Table. **C** Both are non-metals. **D** Both have the same number of electrons in their outer shell. 

**22** Sodium and rubidium are elements in Group I of the Periodic Table. Which statement is correct? **A** Sodium atoms have more electrons than rubidium atoms. **B** Sodium has a lower density than rubidium. **C** Sodium has a lower melting point than rubidium. **D** Sodium is more reactive than rubidium. 

**23** Which properties do the elements chromium, iron and vanadium have in common? 1 They all conduct electricity. 2 They, or their compounds, can act as catalysts. 3 They all form coloured compounds. **A** 1, 2 and 3 **B** 1 and 2 only **C** 1 and 3 only **D** 2 and 3 only 


© UCLES 2017 0620/22/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**24** Why is argon gas used to fill electric lamps? **A** It conducts electricity. **B** It glows when heated. **C** It is less dense than air. **D** It is not reactive. 

**25** What is a property of **all** metals? **A** conduct electricity **B** hard **C** low melting points **D** react with water 

**26** Aluminium is extracted from bauxite by electrolysis. Which row shows the anode material and the anode reaction? anode material anode reaction **A** carbon A _l_ 3+^ + 3e –^ → A _l_ **B** carbon 2O2–^ → O 2 + 4e – **C** steel A _l_ 3+^ + 3e –^ → A _l_ **D** steel 2O2–^ → O 2 + 4e – 

**27** Which statement about the metal zinc is **not** correct? **A** It forms an oxide more readily than iron. **B** It is manufactured by the electrolysis of zinc blende. **C** It is used to make brass. **D** It is used to prevent iron from rusting. 

**28** Calcium nitrate decomposes when it is heated. What is the equation for the thermal decomposition of calcium nitrate? **A** 2Ca(NO 3 ) 2 → 2CaO + O 2 + 4NO 2 **B** Ca(NO 3 ) 2 → Ca(NO 2 ) 2 + O 2 **C** Ca(NO 3 ) 2 → Ca + O 2 + 2NO 2 **D** Ca(NO 3 ) 2 → Ca + 3O 2 + N 2 


© UCLES 2017 0620/22/O/N/17 

**29** The flow chart shows stages in the treatment of river water to produce drinking water. 

 drinking water 

 stage Y 

 stage X 

 settling tank 

 river water What occurs at stages X and Y? X Y A distillation chlorination B distillation filtration C filtration chlorination D filtration distillation 

**30** An experiment to investigate the effect of galvanising iron is shown. 

 air 

 pure iron galvanised iron 

 water 

## X Y 

 The experiment is left for seven days. What happens to the water level in tubes X and Y? tube X tube Y A falls rises B no change no change C rises falls D rises no change 

**31** Which metal is used as a catalyst in the Haber process for the manufacture of ammonia? **A** iron **B** nickel **C** platinum **D** vanadium 


© UCLES 2017 0620/22/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**32** Which process removes carbon dioxide from the atmosphere? **A** combustion of fossil fuels **B** decomposition of carbonates **C** photosynthesis **D** respiration 

**33** Which row shows the conditions used in the manufacture of sulfuric acid by the Contact process? 

 temperature / °C 

 pressure / atm catalyst A 40 200 Fe B 40 200 V 2 O 5 C 400 2 Fe D 400 2 V 2 O 5 

**34** Some marble chips (calcium carbonate) are heated strongly and substances X and Y are formed. Substance X is a white solid that reacts with water, giving out heat. Substance Y is a colourless gas. What are substances X and Y? X Y **A** calcium chloride oxygen **B** calcium hydroxide carbon dioxide **C** calcium oxide carbon dioxide **D** calcium sulfate oxygen 

**35** The structures of four organic compounds are shown. 

## H C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## S 

## H 

## H 

## C C H H C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## T 

## H C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## V 

## H C 

## C 

## H 

## C 

## C 

## H 

## U 

## H 

## H 

## H H 

## H 

 Which compounds are unsaturated? A S only B T and U C U only D V only 


© UCLES 2017 0620/22/O/N/17 

**36** Which statement is **not** correct? **A** Petroleum is a mixture of hydrocarbons. **B** The main constituent of natural gas is ethane. **C** The naphtha fraction of petroleum is used for making chemicals. **D** When natural gas burns in air, carbon dioxide and water are formed. 

**37** X, Y and Z are three hydrocarbons. 

X CH 2 =CH 2 Y CH 3 –CH=CH 2 Z CH 3 –CH 2 –CH=CH (^2) What do compounds X, Y and Z have in common? 1 They are all alkenes. 2 They are all part of the same homologous series. 3 They all have the same boiling point. **A** 1, 2 and 3 **B** 1 and 2 only **C** 1 and 3 only **D** 2 and 3 only **38** The diagram shows a reaction sequence. butane ethene ethanol carbon dioxideand water 

## X Y Z 

 Which row names the processes X, Y and Z? X Y Z A cracking fermentation respiration B cracking hydration combustion C distillation fermentation respiration D distillation hydration combustion 


© UCLES 2017 0620/22/O/N/17 

**39** The structure of an ester is shown. 

 H C C O C 

## H 

## H 

## H O 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## C C H 

 Which substances react to form this ester? A ethanol and ethanoic acid B ethanol and propanoic acid C propanol and ethanoic acid D propanol and propanoic acid 

**40** A polymer can be made from methyl propene. 

 C C 

## H 

## H 

CH (^3) CH (^3) Which diagram shows the structure of the polymer? 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

CH (^3) CH (^3) 

## C 

## A 

## H 

## H 

## C 

CH (^3) CH (^3) 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

CH (^3) CH (^3) 

## H 

## H 

CH (^3) CH (^3) 

## H 

## H 

CH (^3) CH (^3) 

## H 

## H 

CH (^3) CH (^3) 

## C 

## H 

## C 

## H 

CH (^3) 

## C 

## B 

## H 

## C 

## H 

CH (^3) 

## C 

## H 

## C 

## H 

CH 3 CH 3 CH 3 CH (^3) 

## C 

## H 

## C 

CH (^3) C 

## C 

## H 

## C C 

## H 

## C 

CH (^3) H H CH 3 CH 3 H CH (^3) CH (^3) 

## C C C 

## D 

## C C C 


## BLANK PAGE 

© UCLES 2017 0620/22/O/N/17 


## BLANK PAGE 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeInternational Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge LocalExaminations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2017 0620/22/O/N/17 


© UCLES 2017 0620/22/O/N/17 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements^1 Hhydrogen^1 

(^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Beberyllium 9 **Key** atomic numberatomic symbol name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mgmagnesium 24 19 Kpotassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Srstrontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Gegermanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 (^22) Tititanium (^4840) Zrzirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rfrutherfordium– 23 Vvanadium (^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Crchromium (^5242) Momolybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sgseaborgium– (^25) Mnmanganese (^5543) Tctechnetium– (^75) Rerhenium (^186107) Bhbohrium– (^26) Feiron (^5644) Ruruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Iriridium (^192109) Mtmeitnerium– (^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pdpalladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Dsdarmstadtium– (^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rgroentgenium– (^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cdcadmium (^11280) Hgmercury (^201112) Cncopernicium– 114 F _l_ flerovium– (^116) Lvlivermorium– (^7) Nnitrogen 1415 Pphosphorus (^3133) Asarsenic (^7551) Sbantimony 12283 Bibismuth 209 (^8) Ooxygen 1616 Ssulfur (^3234) Seselenium (^7952) Tetellurium (^12884) Popolonium– (^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Brbromine 8053 I iodine 12785 Atastatine– (^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Scscandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) Lalanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). actinium– (^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium^141 (^91) Paprotactinium 231 (^60) Ndneodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pmpromethium– (^93) Npneptunium– (^62) Smsamarium (^15094) Puplutonium– (^63) Eueuropium (^15295) Amamericium– (^64) Gdgadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bkberkelium– (^66) Dydysprosium 16398 Cfcalifornium– (^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Eseinsteinium– (^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Mdmendelevium– (^70) Ybytterbium (^173102) Nonobelium– (^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lrlawrencium– 


