 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all questions. Electronic calculators may be used. You may lose marks if you do not show your working or if you do not use appropriate units. Notes for use in qualitative analysis are provided on pages 11 and 12. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/52 

 Paper 5 Practical Test October/November 2017 1 hour 15 minutes Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: As listed in the Confidential Instructions 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

 This document consists of 10 printed pages and 2 blank pages. 

 [Turn over 

 IB17 11_0620_52/4RP © UCLES 2017 

# *2908845984* 

 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 For Examiner’s Use 

 Total 


**1** You are going to investigate what happens when two different solids, **S** and **T** , dissolve in water. 

 Read all the instructions carefully before starting the experiments. 

 Instructions You are going to carry out two experiments. 

 (a) Experiment 1 

 ● Put the polystyrene cup into the 250 cm^3 beaker for support. ● Use the measuring cylinder to pour 30 cm^3 of distilled water into the polystyrene cup. ● Measure the initial temperature of the water and record it in the first row of the table. ● Add the 2.0 g sample of solid S to the polystyrene cup and stir the solution with the thermometer. ● Measure and record the maximum temperature of the solution. ● Pour the solution away and rinse out the polystyrene cup with distilled water. 

 ● Repeat the procedure using the 3.0 g sample of solid S. Record your results in the appropriate row of the table. ● Repeat the procedure using the 5.0 g sample of solid S. Record your results in the appropriate row of the table. 

 mass of solid S / g initial temperature of the water / °C 

 maximum temperature of the solution / °C 

 2.0 

 3.0 

 5.0 [2] 

 (b) Experiment 2 

 ● Put the polystyrene cup into the 250 cm^3 beaker for support. ● Use the measuring cylinder to pour 30 cm^3 of distilled water into the polystyrene cup. ● Measure the initial temperature of the water and record it in the first row of the table. ● Add the 2.0 g sample of solid T to the polystyrene cup and stir the solution with the thermometer. ● Measure and record the minimum temperature of the solution. ● Pour the solution away and rinse out the polystyrene cup with distilled water. 

 ● Repeat the procedure using the 3.0 g sample of solid T. ● Repeat the procedure using the 4.0 g sample of solid T. ● Repeat the procedure using the 6.0 g sample of solid T. ● Record your results in the appropriate rows of the table. 

 mass of solid T / g 

 initial temperature of the water / °C 

 minimum temperature of the solution / °C 

 2.0 

 3.0 

 4.0 

 6.0 [2] 


 ©UCLES 2017 0620/52/O/N/17 [Turn over 

 (c) Plot your results for Experiment 1 (maximum temperature) and Experiment 2 (minimum temperature) on the grid. Draw two straight lines of best fit. Clearly label your lines. 

## 0.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 

 mass of solid / g 

temperature of the solution / °C 

## 4.0 5.0 6.0 7.0 

## 60 

## 50 

## 40 

## 30 

## 20 

## 10 

## 0 

## [4] 

 (d) (i) From your graph , deduce the maximum temperature of the solution if 6.0 g of solid S were added to 30 cm^3 of distilled water. 

 Show clearly on the grid how you worked out your answer. 

 .............................. °C [2] 

 (ii) From your graph , deduce the minimum temperature of the solution if 4.5 g of solid T were added to 30 cm^3 of distilled water. 

 Show clearly on the grid how you worked out your answer. 

 .............................. °C [2] 

 (e) Use your results to identify the type of energy change that occurs when solid S dissolves in water. 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 


**(f)** Suggest **one** change you could make to the experiments to obtain more accurate results. Explain how this change would make the results more accurate. 

 change ....................................................................................................................................... 

 explanation ................................................................................................................................ 

 .................................................................................................................................................... [2] 

**(g)** Suggest how the reliability of the results could be checked. 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

**(h)** Explain how the temperatures measured would be different if Experiment 1 were repeated using 60 cm^3 of distilled water in each case. 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [2] 

 [Total: 18] 


**©UCLES 2017 0620/52/O/N/17 [Turn over** 

 Question 2 starts on the next page. 


**2** You are provided with two solid salts, **U** and **W**. Carry out the following tests on solid **U** and solid **W** , recording all of your observations at each stage. 

 tests on solid U 

 (a) Describe the appearance of solid U. 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

 Add about half of solid U to about 5 cm^3 of distilled water in a test-tube. Stopper the test-tube and shake it to dissolve solid U and form solution U. 

 Divide solution U into two equal portions in two test-tubes and carry out the following tests. 

 (b) To the first portion of solution U , add about 1 cm^3 of dilute hydrochloric acid. Test the gas produced. Record your observations. 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [3] 

 Keep the second portion of solution U for the test in (g)(i). 

 (c) Identify the gas produced in (b). 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

 (d) Carry out a flame test on solid U. Record your observations. 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

 (e) Identify solid U. 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [2] 


**©UCLES 2017 0620/52/O/N/17 [Turn over** 

 tests on solid W 

 Add about half of solid W to about 5 cm^3 of distilled water in a test-tube. Stopper the test-tube and shake it to dissolve solid W and form solution W. 

 Divide solution W into two equal portions in two test-tubes and carry out the following tests. 

 (f) To the first portion of solution W , add a few drops of dilute nitric acid and about 1 cm^3 of aqueous silver nitrate. Record your observations. 

## .............................................................................................................................................. [2] 

 (g) (i) To the second portion of solution W , add the second portion of solution U. Record your observations. 

## ....................................................................................................................................... [2] 

 (ii) Now add an excess of dilute hydrochloric acid to the mixture from (g)(i). Record your observations. 

## ....................................................................................................................................... [2] 

 (h) What conclusions can you draw about solid W? 

## .................................................................................................................................................... 

## .............................................................................................................................................. [2] 

 [Total: 16] 


**3** When iron nails rust, the mass of the nails increases. Plan an experiment to investigate if iron nails rust more quickly in tap water or in distilled water. You are provided with new iron nails and common laboratory apparatus. 

 ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ..................................................................................................................................................... [6] 

 [Total: 6] 


## BLANK PAGE 


## BLANK PAGE 


**Notes for use in qualitative analysis Tests for anions** 

 anion test test result 

 carbonate (CO 3 2–^ ) add dilute acid effervescence, carbon dioxide produced 

 chloride (C l –^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify with dilute nitric acid, then add aqueous silver nitrate 

 white ppt. 

 bromide (Br –^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify with dilute nitric acid, then add aqueous silver nitrate 

 cream ppt. 

 iodide (I–^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify with dilute nitric acid, then add aqueous silver nitrate 

 yellow ppt. 

 nitrate (NO 3 –^ ) [in solution] 

 add aqueous sodium hydroxide, then aluminium foil; warm carefully 

 ammonia produced 

 sulfate (SO 4 2–^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify, then add aqueous barium nitrate 

 white ppt. 

 sulfite (SO 3 2–^ ) add dilute hydrochloric acid, warm gently and test for the presence of sulfur dioxide 

 sulfur dioxide produced will turn acidified aqueous potassium 

# manganate(VII) from purple to 

 colourless 

**Tests for aqueous cations** 

 cation effect of aqueous sodium hydroxide effect of aqueous ammonia 

 aluminium (A l 3+^ ) white ppt., soluble in excess, giving a colourless solution 

 white ppt., insoluble in excess 

 ammonium (NH 4 +^ ) ammonia produced on warming – 

 calcium (Ca 2+^ ) white ppt., insoluble in excess no ppt., or very slight white ppt. 

# chromium(III) (Cr 3+^ ) green ppt., soluble in excess grey-green ppt., insoluble in excess 

# copper(II) (Cu 2+^ ) light blue ppt., insoluble in excess light blue ppt., soluble in excess, 

 giving a dark blue solution 

# iron(II) (Fe2+^ ) green ppt., insoluble in excess green ppt., insoluble in excess 

# iron(III) (Fe3+^ ) red-brown ppt., insoluble in excess red-brown ppt., insoluble in excess 

 zinc (Zn2+^ ) white ppt., soluble in excess, giving a colourless solution 

 white ppt., soluble in excess, giving a colourless solution 


**Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. E v ery reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity.** 

**To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the C ambridge International Examinations C opyright A cknowledgements B ooklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series.** 

**Cambridge International E xaminations is part of the C ambridge A ssessment G roup. C ambridge A ssessment is the brand name of University of C ambridge L ocal Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of C ambridge.** 

**Tests for gases Flame tests for metal ions** 

 gas test and test results metal ion flame colour 

 ammonia (NH 3 ) turns damp red litmus paper blue lithium (Li +) red 

 carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) turns limewater milky sodium (Na +) yellow 

chlorine (C _l_ (^) 2 ) bleaches damp litmus paper potassium (K+) lilac 

# hydrogen (H 2 ) ‘pops’ with a lighted splint copper(II) (Cu 2+^ ) blue-green 

 oxygen (O 2 ) relights a glowing splint 

 sulfur dioxide (SO 2 ) turns acidified aqueous 

# potassium manganate(VII) from 

 purple to colourless 


