 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/12 Paper 1 May/June 2016 2 hours Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all the questions. Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 

 This document consists of 16 printed pages. 

 DC (ST/SW) 106862/3 © UCLES 2016 [Turn over 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

* 0 9 9 3 8 1 1 3 1 0 * 


© UCLES 2016 0606/12/M/J/16 

 Mathematical Formulae 

## 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

 x 

 b b ac a 

 = 

 − 2 − 4 2 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( _n_ 

# 1 ) a 

_n_ –1 (^) _b_ + 

# ( 

 n 

# 2 ) a 

_n_ –2 (^) _b_ (^2) + … + 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) a 

_n_ – _r_ (^) _br_ (^) + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( _n_ 

# r ) =^ 

 n! ( n – r )! r! 

## 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ 

 sin^2 A + cos^2 A = 1 

 sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A 

 cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC_ 

 a sin A =^ 

 b sin B =^ 

 c sin C 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

 ∆ = 

## 1 

 2 bc^ sin^ A 


© UCLES 2016 0606/12/M/J/16 **[Turn over** 

**1 (a)** The universal set  is the set of real numbers and sets _X_ , _Y_ and _Z_ are such that 

 X = {integer multiples of 5}, 

 Y = {integer multiples of 10}, 

 Z = { r , 2 , e}. 

 Use set notation to complete the two statements below. 

 Y ............... X Y  Z = ............... [2] 

 (b) On each of the Venn diagrams below, shade the region indicated. 

## A B 

## ( A  B )  C A  ( B  C ) 

## C 

##  

## A B 

## C 

##  

## [2] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/12/M/J/16 

**2 (i)** The first 3 terms in the expansion of (^2 41) _x_^ 5 c m are _a b x c_ + (^) _x_ + 2. Find the value of each of the integers _a_ , _b_ and _c_. [3] **(ii)** Hence find the term independent of _x_ in the expansion of (^2 41) _x_^ 3 4 _x_ 5 c m ^ + h. [2] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/12/M/J/16 **[Turn over** 

**3** Vectors **a** , **b** and **c** are such that **a =** _y_ 

## J 2 

## L 

## KK 

## N 

## P 

 OO, b =^1 3 

## J 

## L 

## KK 

## N 

## P 

 OO and c =^5 5 

## J 

## L 

## KK 

## N 

## P 

## OO. 

 (i) Given that a = b c , find the possible values of y. [3] 

 (ii) Given that n ^ b + c h + 4 ^ b c h = m ^ 2 b c h, find the value of n and of m. [3] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/12/M/J/16 

**4 Do not use a calculator in this question.** 

 Find the positive value of x for which ^ 4 + 5 h x^^2 + ^ 2 5 h^ x 1 = 0 , giving your answer in the 

form (^) _b a_ + 5 , where _a_ and _b_ are integers. [6] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/12/M/J/16 **[Turn over** 

**5 (i)** Show that ^ 1 cos _i_ h^ 1 + sec _i_ h =sin _i_ tan _i_. [4] 

 (ii) Hence solve the equation ^ 1 cos i h^ 1 + sec i h =sin i for 0 G i G r radians. [3] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/12/M/J/16 

**6** Show that _x_ 

 4 x 1 d 

d (^) ^e 3 _x_ (^) + h (^) can be written in the form _x px q_ 4 1 e 3 _x_ + ^ + h , where _p_ and _q_ are integers to be found. [5] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/12/M/J/16 **[Turn over** 

## 7 

## A 

## O 

## B 

 y = 1 – 2cos3 x 

 y 

 x 

 The diagram shows part of the graph of y = 1 2cos 3 x , which crosses the x -axis at the point A and has a maximum at the point B. 

 (i) Find the coordinates of A. [2] 

 (ii) Find the coordinates of B. [2] 

 (iii) Showing all your working, find the area of the shaded region bounded by the curve, the x -axis and the perpendicular from B to the x -axis. [4] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/12/M/J/16 

## 8 

## 0.2 

 1 2 3 4 x^2 

## 0.4 

## 0.6 

 lg y 

## 0 

## 0.7 

## 0.8 

## 0.9 

## 1.0 

## 0.1 

## 0.3 

## 0.5 

## 0.0 

## (1, 0.73) 

## (4, 0.10) 

 Variables x and y are such that when lg y is plotted against x^2 , the straight line graph shown above is obtained. 

 (i) Given that y Abx 

 2 = , find the value of A and of b. [4] 

 (ii) Find the value of y when x = 1.5. [2] 

 (iii) Find the positive value of x when y = 2. [2] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/12/M/J/16 **[Turn over** 

**9** A curve passes through the point c^2 , 34 m^ and is such that (^) _x x y_ d^3 10 d 21 = ^^ + h-^. **(i)** Find the equation of the curve. [4] The normal to the curve, at the point where _x_ = 5 , meets the line _y_ =35 at the point _P_. **(ii)** Find the _x_ -coordinate of _P_. [6] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/12/M/J/16 

## 10 

 x cm y cm 

## B 

## C 

## A 

## D 

 The diagram shows a badge, made of thin sheet metal, consisting of two semi-circular pieces, centres B and C , each of radius x cm. They are attached to each other by a rectangular piece of thin sheet metal, ABCD , such that AB and CD are the radii of the semi-circular pieces and AD = BC = y cm. 

 (i) Given that the area of the badge is 20 cm^2 , show that the perimeter, P cm, of the badge is given 

by _P_ = 2 _x_ + (^40) _x_. [4] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/12/M/J/16 **[Turn over** 

 (ii) Given that x can vary, find the minimum value of P , justifying that this value is a minimum. [5] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/12/M/J/16 

**11 (a)** 

## 10 

## 10 

## 20 

 v ms–1 

## 30 

 O 20 30 40 50 60 t^ s 

 The diagram shows the velocity-time graph of a particle P moving in a straight line with velocity v ms–1^ at time t s after leaving a fixed point. 

 (i) Find the distance travelled by the particle P. [2] 

 (ii) Write down the deceleration of the particle when t = 30. [1] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/12/M/J/16 **[Turn over** 

 (b) The diagram shows a velocity-time graph of a particle Q moving in a straight line with velocity v ms–1, at time t s after leaving a fixed point. 

## 5 10 15 20 

## 3 

## 6 

 v ms–1 

 O^ t^ s 

 The displacement of Q at time t s is s m. On the axes below, draw the corresponding displacement-time graph for Q. [2] 

## 5 10 15 20 

## 30 

## 60 

## 90 

 s m 

 O^ t^ s 

 Question 11(c) is printed on the next page. 


© UCLES 2016 0606/12/M/J/16 

 (c) The velocity, v ms–1, of a particle R moving in a straight line, t s after passing through a fixed point O , is given by v = 4 e 2 t + 6. 

 (i) Explain why the particle is never at rest. [1] 

 (ii) Find the exact value of t for which the acceleration of R is 12 ms–2. [2] 

 (iii) Showing all your working, find the distance travelled by R in the interval between t =0 4. and t = 0 5.. [4] 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 


