 This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. 

 DC (ST/SG) 125570 © UCLES 2016 [Turn over 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

* 1 5 0 9 9 5 0 9 3 3 * 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/23 Paper 2 May/June 2016 2 hours Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all the questions. Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 


© UCLES 2016 0606/23/M/J/16 

 Mathematical Formulae 

### 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

 x 

 b b ac a 

 = 

 − 2 − 4 2 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( _n_ 

# 1 ) a 

_n_ –1 (^) _b_ + 

# ( 

 n 

# 2 ) a 

_n_ –2 (^) _b_ (^2) + … + 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) a 

_n_ – _r_ (^) _br_ (^) + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( _n_ 

# r ) =^ 

 n! ( n – r )! r! 

### 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ 

 sin^2 A + cos^2 A = 1 

 sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A 

 cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC_ 

 a sin A =^ 

 b sin B =^ 

 c sin C 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

 ∆ = 

 1 2 bc^ sin^ A 


© UCLES 2016 0606/23/M/J/16 **[Turn over** 

**1** Find the values of _x_ for which ^ _x_ 4 h ^ _x_ + 2 h 27. [3] 

**2 (a)** Illustrate the statements _A_ f _B_ and _B_ f _C_ using the Venn diagram below. [1] 

  

 (b) It is given that the elements of set  are the letters of the alphabet, the elements of set P are the letters in the word maths , the elements of set Q are the letters in the word exam. 

 (i) Write the following using set notation. 

 The letter h is in the word maths. [1] 

 (ii) Write the following using set notation. 

 The number of letters occurring in both of the words maths and exam is two. [1] 

 (iii) List the elements of the set P k Q l. [1] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/23/M/J/16 

**3 Do not use a calculator in this question.** 

**(i)** Find the value of log (^) _pp_^2. [1] **(ii)** Find lg 10 

### 1 

 n 

### J 

### L 

### KK 

### N 

### P 

### OO. [1] 

**(iii)** Show that (^) log lg lg 10 lg^ _y_ 

### 20 4 

 5 

(^) = ^ h (^2) , where _y_ is a constant to be found. [2] **(iv)** Solve log (^) _r_ 2 _x_ + log (^) _r_ 3 _x_ = log _r_ 600. [2] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/23/M/J/16 **[Turn over** 

### 4 

 A 

 B 

 C 

 θ rad 

 The diagram shows 3 circles with centres A , B and C , each of radius 5 cm. Each circle touches the other two circles. Angle BAC is θ radians. 

 (i) Write down the value of θ. [1] 

 (ii) Find the area of the shaded region between the circles. [4] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/23/M/J/16 

**5 Do not use a calculator in this question.** 

 (a) Express 7 

### 8 

### 5 

 in the form a + b , where a and b are integers. [3] 

 (b) Given that 28 + p 3 = ^ q^ + 2 3 h^2 , where p and q are integers, find the values of p and of q. [3] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/23/M/J/16 **[Turn over** 

**6 (i)** Express 4 _x_^2 + 8 _x_ 5 in the form _p x_ ^^ + _q_ h^2 + _r_ , where _p_ , _q_ and _r_ are constants to be found. [3] 

 (ii) State the coordinates of the vertex of y = 4 x^2 + 8 x 5. [2] 

 (iii) On the axes below, sketch the graph of y = 4 x^2 + 8 x 5 , showing the coordinates of the points where the curve meets the axes. [3] 

 O x 

 y 


© UCLES 2016 0606/23/M/J/16 

**7** _O_ , _P_ , _Q_ and _R_ are four points such that _OP_ = **p** , _OQ_ = **q** and _OR_ = 3 **q** 2 **p**. 

 (i) Find, in terms of p and q , 

 (a) PQ , [1] 

 (b) QR. [1] 

 (ii) Justifying your answer, what can be said about the positions of the points P , Q and R? [2] 

 (iii) Given that OP = i + 3 j and that OQ = 2 i + j , find the unit vector in the direction OR. [3] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/23/M/J/16 **[Turn over** 

**8 (a) (i)** Use the Binomial Theorem to expand ^ _a_^ + _b_ h^4 , giving each term in its simplest form. [2] 

 (ii) Hence find the term independent of x in the expansion of x x 

### 2 

### 5 

### 1 4 

### + 

### J 

### L 

### KK 

### N 

### P 

### OO. [2] 

 (b) The coefficient of x^3 in the expansion of 

 x 1 2 

 n + 

### J 

### L 

### KK 

### N 

### P 

 OO equals n 12 

(^5). Find the value of the positive integer _n_. [3] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/23/M/J/16 

**9 (a)** Given that _y_ = _a_ tan _bx_ + _c_ has period _r_ 4 radians and passes through the points ^ 0 , 2 h^ and _r_ , 16 

### 0 

### J 

### L 

### KK 

### N 

### P 

 OO, find the value of each of the constants a , b and c. [3] 

 a = ................................... b = ................................... c = ................................... 

 (b) (i) On the axes below, draw the graph of y = 2 cos 3 x + 1 for 23 r^ G x G^23 r radians. [3] 

 3 

- 2 _r_     2 

-^ _r_     3 

-^ _r_     6 

-^ _r_     6 

 r 3 

 r 2 

 r 3 

 2 r 

 y 

 x 

 –4 

 4 

 O 

 (ii) Using your graph, or otherwise, find the exact solutions of ^ 2 cos 3 x + 1 h^2 = 1 for 

_r_ (^) _x r_ 3 

### 2 

### 3 

- G G^2 radians. [2] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/23/M/J/16 **[Turn over** 

**10 (a) (i)** Find how many 5-digit even numbers can be made using each of the digits 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 once only. [2] 

 (ii) Find how many different 3-digit numbers can be made using the digits 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 if each digit can be used once only. [2] 

 (b) A man and two women are to sit in a row of five empty chairs. Calculate the number of ways they can be seated if 

 (i) the two women must sit next to each other, [2] 

 (ii) all three people must sit next to each other. [2] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/23/M/J/16 

**11 (i)** Find 3 _x x_^2 d _x_ 

 3 

## y ^^ h. [2] 

 The diagram shows part of the curve y 3 x x^2 

 3 = and the lines y = 3 x and 2 y = 27 3 x. The curve and the line y = 3 x meet the x -axis at O and the curve and the line 2 y = 27 3 x meet the x -axis at A. 

 y 3 x x^2 

 3 = 

 y = 3 x^2^ y^^ =^27 -^3 x 

 y 

_O_ (^) _A x B_ **(ii)** Find the coordinates of _A_. [1] **(iii)** Verify that the coordinates of _B_ are ^3 9^ , h. [1] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/23/M/J/16 **[Turn over** 

 (iv) Find the area of the shaded region. [4] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/23/M/J/16 

**12** A curve has equation _y_ = (^2) _xx_^^ -^ 1 5 12 _x_. **(i)** Find (^) _x y_ d d 

. [3] 

 (ii) Find x 

 y d 

 d 2 

 2 

. [2] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/23/M/J/16 

 (iii) Find the coordinates of the stationary points of the curve and determine their nature. [5] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/23/M/J/16 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

### BLANK PAGE 


