 This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. 

 DC (SLM) 122174 © UCLES 2016 [Turn over 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

* 5 8 7 0 4 3 8 4 3 5 * 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/13 Paper 1 May/June 2016 2 hours Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all the questions. Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 


© UCLES 2016 0606/13/M/J/16 

 Mathematical Formulae 

### 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

 x a 

 b b ac 2 

### = -^!^2 -^4 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( _n_ 

# 1 ) a 

_n_ –1 (^) _b_ + 

# ( 

 n 

# 2 ) a 

_n_ –2 (^) _b_ (^2) + … + 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) a 

_n_ – _r_ (^) _br_ (^) + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( _n_ 

# r ) =^ 

 n! ( n – r )! r! 

### 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ 

 sin^2 A + cos^2 A = 1 

 sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A 

 cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC_ 

 a sin A =^ 

 b sin B =^ 

 c sin C 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

### ∆ =^ 

 1 2 

 bc sin A 


© UCLES 2016 0606/13/M/J/16 **[Turn over** 

**1** Find the value of _k_ for which the curve _y_ = 2 _x_^2 3 _x_ + _k_ 

 (i) passes through the point ( , 4 7 ), [1] 

 (ii) meets the x -axis at one point only. [2] 

**2 (a)** Solve the equation 16 3 _x_^^ -^1 = 8 _x_ +^2. [3] 

 (b) Given that a b 

 a b 

 3 

 32 21 

 3 

 1 2 

 1 

- 

  j = a p^ b q , find the value of each of the constants p and q. [2] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/13/M/J/16 

**3** Find the equation of the normal to the curve _y_ = 1 n ( 2 _x_ 2 7 )at the point where the curve crosses the positive _x_ -axis. Give your answer in the form _ax_ + _b y_ + _c_ = 0 , where _a_ , _b_ and _c_ are integers. [5] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/13/M/J/16 **[Turn over** 

**4 (a)** Given the matrices **A** 

### 1 

### 3 

### 2 

### 0 

### = 

### J

### L 

### KK 

### N 

### P 

 OO and B^3 1 

### 0 

### 2 

### = 

### J 

### L 

### KK 

### N 

### P 

 OO , find A^2 2 B. [3] 

 (b) Using a matrix method, solve the equations 

 4 x + y = 1 , 10 x + 3 y = 1. [4] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/13/M/J/16 

**5 Do not use a calculator in this question.** 

**(i)** Show that (^) d d e^ _x x_^ e^ _px_ e 4 _x x x_ 4 

- 4 =^4 

### J 

### L 

### KK 

### N 

### P 

 OO , where p is an integer to be found. [4] 

 (ii) Hence find the exact value of x e d x 

n (^4) _x_ 0 1 2 

## y , giving your answer in the form a n c 

 b 1 2 + , where a , b and c are integers to be found. [4] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/13/M/J/16 **[Turn over** 

**6** The function f is defined by f ( ) _x_ = 2 _x_ + 5 for 5 G _x_ 10. 

 (i) Write down the range of f. [2] 

 (ii) Find f -^1 ( ) x and state its domain and range. [4] 

The function g is defined by g ( ) _x_ (^) _x_ 

### 4 

 = for 5 G x 1 1. 

 (iii) Solve fg ( ) x = 0. [3] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/13/M/J/16 

### 7 

 75 m 2.4^ ms 

 –1 

 30 m 

### B 

### A 

 The diagram shows a river with parallel banks. The river is 75 m wide and is flowing with a speed of 2.4 ms–1. A speedboat travels in a straight line from a point A on one bank to a point B on the opposite bank, 30 m downstream from A. The speedboat can travel at a speed of 4.5 ms–1^ in still water. 

 (i) Find the angle to the bank and the direction in which the speedboat is steered. [4] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/13/M/J/16 **[Turn over** 

 (ii) Find the time the speedboat takes to travel from A to B. [4] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/13/M/J/16 

**8 Solutions to this question by accurate drawing will not be accepted.** 

 Three points have coordinates A ( 8 6 , ), B ( ,4 2 ) and C ( 1 7 , ). The line through C perpendicular to AB intersects AB at the point P. 

 (i) Find the equation of the line AB. [2] 

 (ii) Find the equation of the line CP. [2] 

 (iii) Show that P is the midpoint of AB. [3] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/13/M/J/16 **[Turn over** 

 (iv) Calculate the length of CP. [1] 

 (v) Hence find the area of the triangle ABC. [2] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/13/M/J/16 

**9 (i)** Show that 2 cos _x_ cot _x_ + 1 = cot _x_ + 2 cos _x_ can be written in the form ( _a_ cos _x_ _b_ ) ( cos _x_ sin _x_ )= 0 , where _a_ and _b_ are constants to be found. [4] 

 (ii) Hence, or otherwise, solve 2 cos x cot x + 1 = cot x + 2 cos x for 0 1 x 1 r. [3] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/13/M/J/16 **[Turn over** 

**10 (i)** Given that f ( ) _x_ = 4 _x_^3 + _kx_ + _p_ is exactly divisible by _x_ + 2 and f l ( ) _x_ is exactly divisible by 2 _x_ 1 , find the value of _k_ and of _p_. [4] 

 (ii) Using the values of k and p found in part (i) , show that f ( ) x = ( x + 2 ) ( ax^2 + bx + c ), where a , b and c are integers to be found. [2] 

 (iii) Hence show that f ( ) x = 0 has only one solution and state this solution. [2] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/13/M/J/16 

### 11 

### B 

### O 

 2 θ rad 

### A 

 r cm 

 The diagram shows a circle, centre O , radius r cm. The points A and B lie on the circle such that angle AOB = 2 i radians. 

 (i) Find, in terms of r and i , an expression for the length of the chord AB. [1] 

**(ii)** Given that the perimeter of the shaded region is 20 cm, show that _r_ = (^) _i_ +^10 sin _i_. [2] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/13/M/J/16 

**(iii)** Given that _r_ and _i_ can vary, find the value of (^) dd _r i_ when _i_ = 6^ _r_^. [4] **(iv)** Given that _r_ is increasing at the rate of 15 cm s–1, find the corresponding rate of change of _i_ when _i_ = 6^ _r_^. [3] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/13/M/J/16 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

### BLANK PAGE 


