 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 16 printed pages. 

 IB18 06_0625_13/4RP © UCLES 2018 [Turn over 

# *9915199420* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## PHYSICS 0625/13 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) May/June 2018 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. Take the weight of 1.0 kg to be 10 N (acceleration of free fall = 10 m / s 2 ). 


© UCLES 2018 0625/13/M/J/18 

**1** A length of cotton is measured between two points on a ruler. 

 cm 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 

 cotton 

 When the length of cotton is wound closely around a pen, it goes round six times. 

 pen 

 six turns of cotton 

 What is the distance once round the pen? 

 A 2.2 cm B 2.6 cm C 13.2 cm D 15.6 cm 

**2** Four balls with different masses are dropped from the heights shown. 

 Air resistance may be ignored. 

 Which ball has the greatest average speed? 

 4.0 kg 

## A 

 1.0 m 

 3.0 kg 

## B 

 2.0 m 

 2.0 kg 

## C 

 3.0 m 

 1.0 kg 

## D 

 4.0 m 

 ground 

**3** A car takes 15 minutes to travel along a road that is 20 km long. 

 What is the average speed of the car? 

 A 0.75 km / h B 5.0 km / h C 80 km / h D 300 km / h 


© UCLES 2018 0625/13/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**4** A person steps onto a bathroom scales. 

 The bathroom scales records both mass and weight. 

 Which row shows the readings on the scales? 

 mass weight 

 A 60 N 600 kg 

 B 60 kg 600 N 

 C 600 kg 60 N 

 D 600 N 60 kg 

**5** Which properties of an object can be changed by a force? 

 A direction of motion, mass and speed 

 B direction of motion, shape and speed 

 C direction of motion and speed only 

 D mass, shape and speed 

**6** A man holds a ladder in four different positions, pivoting around his shoulder. 

 The weight of the ladder causes a moment about the man’s shoulder. 

 In which position is the moment greatest? 

 A B C D 


© UCLES 2018 0625/13/M/J/18 

**7** A hole is drilled in a square tile. The diagram shows the tile hanging freely on a nail. 

 Where is the centre of mass of the tile? 

 A 

## D 

## B 

## C 

 nail 

 tile 

**8** Which method of drying clothes has the least impact on the environment? 

 A Evaporate the water in them in an electrically heated tumble dryer. 

 B Hang them on a washing line in direct sunlight. 

 C Remove the water from them in an electric spin dryer. 

 D Suspend them close to a coal fire. 

**9** A student does work by pulling a box across a horizontal floor. 

 She now pulls a second box along the same floor. 

 Which row indicates that the student is now doing twice as much work? 

 force used to pull box 

 distance the box is pulled 

 A is doubled is doubled 

 B is doubled is halved 

 C stays the same is doubled 

 D stays the same is halved 


© UCLES 2018 0625/13/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**10** A simple barometer includes a column of mercury. 

 Which property of this column of mercury is used to give a measurement of atmospheric pressure? 

 A its cross-sectional area 

 B its height 

 C its temperature 

 D its thermal capacity 

**11** The diagram shows some liquid in a measuring cylinder. 

 The mass of the liquid is 16 g. 

## 25 

## 20 

## 15 

## 10 

## 5 

 cm^3 

 What is the density of the liquid? 

 A 0.80 g / cm 3 B 1.25 g / cm 3 C 36 g / cm 3 D 320 g / cm 3 

**12** Brownian motion of particles is observed. 

 Which statements describe the movement of the particles? 

 1 The particles all travel along a curved path. 

 2 The particles move randomly. 

 3 The particles all travel in the same direction. 

 A 1 and 3 B 1 only C 2 and 3 D 2 only 


© UCLES 2018 0625/13/M/J/18 

**13** A pure liquid is left in an open beaker and some of the liquid molecules escape by evaporation. 

 Which statement about this process is correct? 

 A None of the escaping molecules return to the liquid. 

 B The escaping molecules are generally the more energetic ones. 

 C The rate of escape of the molecules can be increased by increasing the depth of the liquid in the beaker. 

 D The temperature of the remaining liquid is unaffected by the escape of the molecules. 

**14** A wooden wheel can be strengthened by putting a tight circle of iron around it. 

 wooden wheel 

 iron circle 

 Which action would make it easier to fit the circle over the wood? 

 A cooling the iron circle 

 B heating the iron circle 

 C heating the wooden wheel and cooling the iron circle 

 D heating the wooden wheel but not heating or cooling the iron circle 

**15** A student wishes to calibrate a mercury-in-glass thermometer with a °C scale. 

 Which values should she use for the lower fixed point and for the upper fixed point? 

 lower fixed point upper fixed point 

 A melting point of ice boiling point of mercury 

 B melting point of ice boiling point of water 

 C melting point of mercury boiling point of mercury 

 D melting point of mercury boiling point of water 


© UCLES 2018 0625/13/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**16** Which diagram shows how the thermal capacity of a silver object depends on its mass? 

 thermal capacity 

 mass 

## A 

## 0 

## 0 

 thermal capacity 

 mass 

## B 

## 0 

## 0 

 thermal capacity 

 mass 

## C 

## 0 

## 0 

 thermal capacity 

 mass 

## D 

## 0 

## 0 

**17** The diagram shows a pan used for cooking food. 

 base of pan 

 handle of pan 

 Which row is correct for the materials used to make the base and the handle of the pan? 

 base of pan handle of pan 

 A good thermal conductor good thermal conductor 

 B good thermal conductor poor thermal conductor 

 C poor thermal conductor good thermal conductor 

 D poor thermal conductor poor thermal conductor 


© UCLES 2018 0625/13/M/J/18 

**18** A saucepan of water is heated from its base on an electric hob. 

 After five minutes the water near the top of the saucepan is becoming hot. 

 What is the main process of heat transfer within the water? 

 A condensation 

 B conduction 

 C convection 

 D radiation 

**19** The diagram shows a wave. 

 2.0 

## 1.0 

## 0 

## –1.0 

## –2.0 

 displacement / cm 

 distance / cm 

## 0 4.0 8.0 12.0 16.0 20.0 24.0 28.0 

 Which row is correct? 

 amplitude of the wave / cm 

 wavelength of the wave / cm 

 A 1.0 4.0 

 B 1.0 8.0 

 C 2.0 4.0 

 D 2.0 8.0 


© UCLES 2018 0625/13/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**20** The diagram shows a ray of light passing from glass to air, at the critical angle. 

## X 

W (^) Y air Z glass Which angles are the angle of incidence and the angle of refraction? angle of incidence angle of refraction **A** W Y **B** W Z **C** X Y **D** X Z **21** Scout P signals to scout Q on the other side of a valley by using a mirror to reflect the Sun’s light. mirror scout P Sun’s light scout Q Which mirror position allows the Sun’s light to be reflected to scout Q? Sun’s light Sun’s light Sun’s light Sun’s light mirror 

## A B C D 


© UCLES 2018 0625/13/M/J/18 

**22** It takes 0.24 seconds for a microwave signal to travel from a transmitting station on Earth to a satellite and then back to the station on Earth. Microwaves travel at 3.0 × 10 8 m / s. 

 How far is the transmitting station from the satellite? 

 A 36 000 km 

 B 72 000 km 

 C 36 000 000 km 

 D 72 000 000 km 

**23** The diagram shows the ranges of human hearing and of ultrasound waves. 

## 0 10 1 

## 2 × 10 1 2 × 10 4 

## 10 2 10 3 10 4 10 5 10 6 

 range of human hearing ultrasound 

 To which characteristic of sound waves do the numbers on the diagram refer? 

 A amplitude in cm 

 B frequency in Hz 

 C speed in metres / second 

 D wavelength in metres 

**24** A permanent magnet is placed close to a bar of soft iron. 

## S N P Q 

 permanent magnet soft iron bar 

 What are the polarities of end P and of end Q? 

 end P end Q 

 A N N 

 B N S 

 C S N 

 D S S 


© UCLES 2018 0625/13/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**25** The diagram shows a permanent bar magnet placed on a wooden table. A student draws arrows to show the direction of the magnetic field at four points. 

 Which arrow shows the direction of the magnetic field at that position? 

## N S 

## A 

## C 

## D B 

**26** Which statement about electric charges is correct? 

 A Like charges attract and unlike charges attract. 

 B Like charges attract and unlike charges repel. 

 C Like charges repel and unlike charges attract. 

 D Like charges repel and unlike charges repel. 

**27** The diagrams show two readings on the same ammeter. Reading 1 is taken before the ammeter is connected in a circuit. Reading 2 shows the reading when the ammeter is connected in a circuit. 

 2 3 

## 1 

## 0 

## A 

 reading 1 not connected in a circuit 

## 2 

## 3 

## 1 

## 0 

## A 

 reading 2 connected in a circuit 

 What is the current in the circuit? 

 A 0.80 A B 0.90 A C 0.95 A D 1.20 A 


© UCLES 2018 0625/13/M/J/18 

**28** A student measures the potential difference across a device and the current in the device. 

 Which calculation gives the resistance of the device? 

 A current + potential difference 

 B current ÷ potential difference 

 C potential difference ÷ current 

 D potential difference × current 

**29** A battery in an electric circuit is connected to a lamp. 

 Chemical energy in the battery is transferred to which other types of energy? 

 A internal energy only 

 B kinetic energy and sound energy 

 C light energy and thermal energy 

 D light energy only 

**30** Which component is represented by the symbol shown? 

 A fixed resistor 

 B fuse 

 C thermistor 

 D variable resistor 


© UCLES 2018 0625/13/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**31** A student sets up a circuit which she calls circuit 1. She records the value of the current _I_ 1 , and calculates the resistance _R_ 1 of the circuit. 

## A 

## V 

 circuit 1 

## A 

## V 

 circuit 2 

 She then connects an identical resistor in parallel with the original resistor. She calls this circuit 2. She records current I 2 and calculates the total resistance R 2 of this circuit. 

 Which row correctly compares the two currents and the two resistances in the circuits? 

## I 2 R 2 

 A greater than I 1 greater than R 1 

 B greater than I 1 less than R 1 

 C less than I 1 greater than R 1 

 D less than I 1 less than R 1 

**32** A student sets up this circuit. 

 What is the purpose of the circuit? 

 A to allow a lamp to be made dimmer or brighter as required 

 B to amplify the sound of a voice 

 C to light a lamp in the dark 

 D to sound a bell when the temperature rises 


© UCLES 2018 0625/13/M/J/18 

**33** The diagram shows two voltmeters P and Q connected to a potential divider. 

## X 

## V 

## V 

 voltmeter P 

 voltmeter Q 

 The sliding connection at point X is moved towards the top of the diagram. 

 What happens to the reading on P and to the reading on Q? 

 reading on P reading on Q 

 A decreases decreases 

 B decreases increases 

 C increases decreases 

 D increases increases 

**34** The diagram shows a transformer. 

 primary coil secondary coil 

 core 

 Which materials are the most suitable for the core and for the coils? 

 core material coil material 

 A copper copper 

 B copper iron 

 C iron copper 

 D iron iron 


© UCLES 2018 0625/13/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**35** A current-carrying conductor placed in a magnetic field experiences a force. 

 Which changes result in reversing the direction of the force? 

 A Decrease the current, keeping the field direction constant. 

 B Increase the current and reverse the field direction. 

 C Increase the current, keeping the field direction constant. 

 D Reverse the current and reverse the field direction. 

**36** A solenoid is connected to a battery. 

 solenoid 

 axis of solenoid 

 Which statement about the magnetic field at the centre of the solenoid is correct? 

 A The magnetic field along the axis is zero. 

 B The direction of the magnetic field is at an angle of 45° to the axis. 

 C The direction of the magnetic field is parallel to the axis. 

 D The direction of the magnetic field is perpendicular to the axis. 

**37** In the atomic model, an atom consists of a central mass, orbited by much smaller particles. 

 central mass 

 orbiting particle 

 What is the name of the central mass and of the orbiting particles? 

 central mass orbiting particles 

 A neutron α-particles 

 B neutron electrons 

 C nucleus α-particles 

 D nucleus electrons 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2018 0625/13/M/J/18 

**38** One isotope of lead is represented by the nuclide symbol 21482 Pb. 

 How many neutrons and how many protons does one nucleus of this isotope contain? 

 number of neutrons 

 number of protons 

 A 82 132 

 B 82 214 

 C 132 82 

 D 214 82 

**39** Three sources of background radiation are listed. 

 1 cosmic rays 

 2 medical X-rays 

 3 radioactive emissions from radon gas from the ground 

 Which of these sources are naturally occurring? 

 A 1 and 3 only B 1 only C 2 and 3 only D 2 only 

**40** The rates of emission from four radioactive sources are measured at 20 minute intervals. 

 Each row in the table shows the results for one of the radioactive sources. 

 Which source has the longest half-life? 

 rate of emission / emissions per minute 

 time 0 time 20 min time 40 min 

 A 120 60 30 

 B 120 110 101 

 C 240 60 15 

 D 240 170 122 


