 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all questions. Electronic calculators may be used. You may lose marks if you do not show your working or if you do not use appropriate units. Notes for use in qualitative analysis are provided on pages 7 and 8. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/52 

 Paper 5 Practical Test February/March 2017 1 hour 15 minutes Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: As listed in the Confidential Instructions 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

 This document consists of 8 printed pages. 

 [Turn over 

 IB17 03_0620_52/5RP © UCLES 2017 

# *5444126075* 

 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 For Examiner’s Use 

 Total 


**©UCLES 2017 0620/52/F/M/17** 

**1** You are going to investigate the reaction between dilute hydrochloric acid and two different aqueous solutions of sodium hydroxide labelled solution **O** and solution **P**. 

 Read all the instructions carefully before starting the experiments. 

 Instructions You are going to carry out two experiments. 

 (a) Experiment 1 

 ● Fill the burette up to the 0.0 cm^3 mark with dilute hydrochloric acid. ● Use the measuring cylinder to pour 20 cm^3 of solution O into the conical flask. ● Add 10 drops of thymolphthalein indicator to the conical flask. ● Add the dilute hydrochloric acid from the burette 1 cm^3 at a time, while swirling the flask, until the solution just changes colour. ● Record the burette readings in the table. 

 (b) Experiment 2 

 ● Fill the burette up to the 0.0 cm^3 mark with dilute hydrochloric acid. ● Empty the conical flask and rinse it with distilled water. ● Use the measuring cylinder to pour 20 cm^3 of solution P into the conical flask. ● Add 10 drops of thymolphthalein indicator to the conical flask. ● Add the dilute hydrochloric acid from the burette 1 cm^3 at a time, while swirling the flask, until the solution just changes colour. ● Record the burette readings in the table and complete the table. 

 Experiment 1 Experiment 2 

 final burette reading / cm^3 initial burette reading / cm^3 

 difference / cm^3 [4] 

 (c) What colour change was observed in the conical flask in Experiment 1? 

 from ................................................................ to ................................................................ [1] 

 (d) What type of chemical reaction occurs when dilute hydrochloric acid reacts with sodium hydroxide solution? 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 


**©UCLES 2017 0620/52/F/M/17 [Turn over** 

 (e) (i) Which solution of sodium hydroxide, solution O or solution P , is the more concentrated? Explain your answer. 

 ............................................................................................................................................. 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [2] 

 (ii) How many times more concentrated is this solution of sodium hydroxide than the other solution of sodium hydroxide? 

## ....................................................................................................................................... [1] 

 (f) If Experiment 2 were repeated using 10 cm^3 of solution P , what volume of dilute hydrochloric acid would be needed? 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [2] 

 (g) What would be the effect, if any, on the volume of dilute hydrochloric acid used in Experiment 1 if the solution of sodium hydroxide were warmed before adding the dilute hydrochloric acid? Give a reason for your answer. 

 effect on volume ........................................................................................................................ 

 reason ........................................................................................................................................ [2] 

 (h) (i) What would be a more accurate method of measuring the volume of the sodium hydroxide solution? 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [1] 

 (ii) Suggest how the reliability of the results could be checked. 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [1] 

 (i) Aqueous sodium hydroxide reacts with aqueous calcium chloride to form a precipitate of calcium hydroxide. 

 Use this information to suggest a different method of finding out which of the solutions of sodium hydroxide is the more concentrated. 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [3] 

 [Total: 18] 


**©UCLES 2017 0620/52/F/M/17** 

**2** You are provided with two solids **Q** and **R** which are both salts. Carry out the following tests on each solid, recording all of your observations at each stage. 

 tests on solid Q 

 (a) Describe the appearance of solid Q. 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

 Add about 10 cm^3 of distilled water to all of solid Q in the test-tube and shake to dissolve the solid. 

 Divide the solution into three equal portions in three test-tubes and carry out the following tests. 

 (b) (i) To the first portion of the solution, add drops of aqueous sodium hydroxide until a change is seen. Record your observations. 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [2] 

 (ii) Now add an excess of aqueous sodium hydroxide to the mixture. Record your observations. 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [1] 

 (c) (i) To the second portion of the solution, add drops of aqueous ammonia until a change is seen. Record your observations. 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [2] 

 (ii) Now add an excess of aqueous ammonia to the mixture. Record your observations. 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [1] 

 (d) To the third portion of the solution, add a few drops of dilute nitric acid and about 1 cm^3 of aqueous silver nitrate. Record your observations. 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

 Keep your mixture from test (d) to compare the result with test (h). 

 (e) Identify solid Q. 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [2] 


**©UCLES 2017 0620/52/F/M/17 [Turn over** 

 tests on solid R 

 (f) Carry out a flame test on solid R. Record your observations. 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

 Dissolve the rest of solid R in about 5 cm^3 of distilled water in a test-tube. Shake the mixture to dissolve the solid. Divide the solution into two equal portions in two test-tubes. 

 (g) To the first portion of the solution, add a few drops of dilute nitric acid and about 1 cm^3 of aqueous barium nitrate. Record your observations. 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

 (h) To the second portion of the solution, add a few drops of dilute nitric acid and about 1 cm^3 of aqueous silver nitrate. Compare the result with test (d). Record your observations for test (h). 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [2] 

 (i) Identify solid R. 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [2] 

 [Total: 16] 


**©UCLES 2017 0620/52/F/M/17** 

**3** When solid barium hydroxide is added to solid ammonium chloride a reaction takes place. 

 (a) Describe an experiment to show that this reaction is endothermic. 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

## .................................................................................................................................................... 

## .................................................................................................................................................... 

## .............................................................................................................................................. [4] 

 (b) How could you show whether or not the final mixture contains ammonium ions? 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [2] 

 [Total: 6] 


**©UCLES 2017 0620/52/F/M/17** 

**Notes for use in qualitative analysis Tests for anions** 

 anion test test result 

 carbonate (CO 3 2–^ ) add dilute acid effervescence, carbon dioxide produced 

 chloride (C l –^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify with dilute nitric acid, then add aqueous silver nitrate 

 white ppt. 

 bromide (Br –^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify with dilute nitric acid, then add aqueous silver nitrate 

 cream ppt. 

 iodide (I–^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify with dilute nitric acid, then add aqueous silver nitrate 

 yellow ppt. 

 nitrate (NO 3 –^ ) [in solution] 

 add aqueous sodium hydroxide, then aluminium foil; warm carefully 

 ammonia produced 

 sulfate (SO 4 2–^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify, then add aqueous barium nitrate 

 white ppt. 

 sulfite (SO 3 2–^ ) add dilute hydrochloric acid, warm gently and test for the presence of sulfur dioxide 

 sulfur dioxide produced will turn acidified aqueous potassium 

# manganate(VII) from purple to 

 colourless 

**Tests for aqueous cations** 

 cation effect of aqueous sodium hydroxide effect of aqueous ammonia 

 aluminium (A l 3+^ ) white ppt., soluble in excess giving a colourless solution 

 white ppt., insoluble in excess 

 ammonium (NH 4 +^ ) ammonia produced on warming – 

 calcium (Ca 2+^ ) white ppt., insoluble in excess no ppt., or very slight white ppt. 

# chromium(III) (Cr 3+^ ) green ppt., soluble in excess grey-green ppt., insoluble in excess 

# copper(II) (Cu 2+^ ) light blue ppt., insoluble in excess light blue ppt., soluble in excess, 

 giving a dark blue solution 

# iron(II) (Fe2+^ ) green ppt., insoluble in excess green ppt., insoluble in excess 

# iron(III) (Fe3+^ ) red-brown ppt., insoluble in excess red-brown ppt., insoluble in excess 

 zinc (Zn2+^ ) white ppt., soluble in excess, giving a colourless solution 

 white ppt., soluble in excess, giving a colourless solution 


 ©UCLES 2017 0620/52/F/M/17 

 Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. E v ery reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

**o avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the C ambridge InternationalT Examinations C opyright A cknowledgements B ooklet. T his is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. Cambridge International E xaminations is part of the C ambridge A ssessment G roup. C ambridge A ssessment is the brand name of U niversity of C ambridge L ocal Examinations S yndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the U niversity of C ambridge.** 

 Tests for gases Flame tests for metal ions 

 gas test and test results metal ion flame colour 

 ammonia (NH 3 ) turns damp, red litmus paper blue lithium (Li +) red 

 carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) turns limewater milky sodium (Na +) yellow 

chlorine (C _l_ (^) 2 ) bleaches damp litmus paper potassium (K+) lilac 

# hydrogen (H 2 ) ‘pops’ with a lighted splint copper(II) (Cu 2+^ ) blue-green 

 oxygen (O 2 ) relights a glowing splint 

 sulfur dioxide (SO 2 ) turns acidified aqueous 

# potassium manganate(VII) from 

 purple to colourless 


