 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 16 printed pages. IB17 03_0620_12/3RP© UCLES 2017 [Turn over 

# *7306980568* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/12 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) February/March 2017 Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet^ 45 minutes Soft clean eraserSoft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid.Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you.DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

There areanswers A (^) ,forty B, C questions on this paper. Answerand D. all questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet.A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2017 0620/12/F/M/17 

1 A bottle of aqueous ammonia is placed on a table in a corner of the laboratory. The stopper is removed and after a few minutes all the students in the room can smell the ammonia. Which process occurs? A Brownian motion B diffusion C dissolving D distillation 

2 A student is investigating a coloured mixture using chromatography. paper 

 pencil line 

 solvent Where should the student place the coloured mixture? A in the solvent B just above the pencil line C just below the pencil line D on the pencil line 


© UCLES 2017 0620/12/F/M/17 [Turn over 

3 The diagrams show liquids in a burette and a measuring cylinder. 

 50 40 30 

## 27 

## 28 

 burette measuring cylinder Which row shows the correct readings for the burette and the measuring cylinder? burette measuringcylinder A 27.8 42 B 27.8 44 C 28.2 42 D 28.2 44 

4 The diagram shows how muddy water can be purified. muddy water 

 clean water 

 fine sand gravel small pebbles 

 Which process for purifying the muddy water is shown? A crystallisation B distillation C filtration D solvent extraction 


© UCLES 2017 0620/12/F/M/17 

5 The aluminium ion, Al 3+, has the same electronic structure as an atom of which noble gas? A argon B helium C krypton D neon 

6 A covalent molecule M contains a total of four shared electrons. What is M? A ammonia, NH 3 B hydrogen chloride, HCl C methane, CH 4 D water, H 2 O 

7 Three substances have the properties shown. ● X conducts electricity when solid and when molten. ● Y is soluble in water and the solution conducts electricity. ● Z only conducts electricity when molten. What are X, Y and Z? X Y Z A Ca MgO NaOH B Ca NaOH MgO C MgO Ca NaOH D MgO NaOH Ca 


© UCLES 2017 0620/12/F/M/17 [Turn over 

8 Caffeine is a stimulant found in coffee. 

## O N 

## C 

## C 

## C 

## C H 

## C N 

## N 

## N 

## H 3 C 

CH (^3) CH (^3) 

## O 

 caffeine Which formula represents caffeine? A C 7 H 10 N 4 O 2 B C 8 H 10 N 3 O 2 C C 8 H 10 N 4 O 2 D C 8 H 11 N 4 O 2 

9 Four substances are electrolysed. The substances are concentrated aqueous sodium chloride, concentrated hydrochloric acid, 

# molten lead(II) bromide and molten sodium oxide. 

 Which statement about these electrolysis reactions is correct? A A colourless gas is formed at the anode when molten sodium oxide is electrolysed. B A green gas is formed at the cathode when concentrated hydrochloric acid is electrolysed. 

# C A metal is formed at the anode when molten lead(II) bromide is electrolysed. 

 D A metal is formed at the cathode when concentrated aqueous sodium chloride is electrolysed. 

10 Ammonium chloride is added to 100 cm^3 of water. The temperature changes from 25 °C to 20 °C. Which type of reaction occurs? A endothermic B exothermic C freezing D neutralisation 


© UCLES 2017 0620/12/F/M/17 

11 A diagram for the energy change during an exothermic reaction is shown. 

 energy 

 reactants 

 products 

 For which reactions would this be an appropriate diagram? 1 CH 4 + 2O 2 → CO 2 + 2H 2 O 2 2H 2 + O 2 → 2H 2 O 3 C + O 2 → CO 2 A none of them B 1 and 2 only C 2 and 3 only D all of them 

12 The diagram shows the apparatus used to measure the rate of a chemical reaction. 

 52.73g 

 reactants 

 balance 

 For which reaction can the rate be measured using this apparatus? A 2Na + Cl 2 → 2NaCl B NaOH + HCl → NaCl + H 2 O C Na 2 O + 2HCl → 2NaCl + H 2 O D Na 2 CO 3 + 2HCl → 2NaCl + H 2 O + CO 2 


© UCLES 2017 0620/12/F/M/17 [Turn over 

# 13 Copper(II) carbonate reacts with dilute sulfuric acid. 

 CuCO 3 (s) + H 2 SO 4 (aq) → CuSO 4 (aq) + CO 2 (g) + H 2 O(l) The rate of the reaction can be changed by varying the conditions. Which changes always increase the rate of this chemical reaction? 1 increasing the concentration of sulfuric acid 

# 2 increasing the size of the pieces of copper(II) carbonate 

 3 increasing the temperature 4 increasing the volume of sulfuric acid A 1, 3 and 4 B 1 and 3 only C 2 and 3 D 3 and 4 only 

14 In which reaction is the first substance in the equation oxidised? A CaO + H 2 O → Ca(OH) 2 B 4FeO + O 2 → 2Fe 2 O 3 C SnO 2 + 2H 2 → Sn + 2H 2 O D ZnCO 3 → ZnO + CO 2 

15 The equation for the effect of heat on hydrated sodium carbonate is as shown. Na 2 CO 3 .10H 2 O(s) Na 2 CO 3 (s) + 10H 2 O(g) Statements made by four students about the reaction are given. P Anhydrous sodium carbonate is formed. Q Steam is formed. R There is a colour change from blue to white. S The reaction is reversible. Which students’ statements are correct? A P, Q and R only B P, Q and S only C Q, R and S only D P, Q, R and S 


© UCLES 2017 0620/12/F/M/17 

16 Which reaction is a neutralisation reaction? A AgNO 3 + HCl → AgCl + HNO 3 B CaCO 3 → CaO + CO 2 C 4Na + O 2 → 2Na 2 O D 2NaOH + H 2 SO 4 → Na 2 SO 4 + 2H 2 O 

17 Elements W and X are metals. Elements Y and Z are non-metals. The oxides of W, X, Y and Z all form solutions when added to water. Which statement is correct? A The solution of the oxide of element W turns blue litmus red. B The solution of the oxide of element X fizzes when sodium carbonate is added. C The solution of the oxide of element Y has a pH greater than pH 7. D The solution of the oxide of element Z fizzes when powdered magnesium is added. 

18 A student is given an unknown solution. 

# Which two tests provide evidence that the solution is copper(II) sulfate? 

 1 adding dilute hydrochloric acid 2 adding aqueous sodium hydroxide 3 adding dilute nitric acid, then silver nitrate solution 4 adding dilute nitric acid, then barium nitrate solution A 1 and 3 B 1 and 4 C 2 and 3 D 2 and 4 


© UCLES 2017 0620/12/F/M/17 [Turn over 

19 The diagram shows the steps in the preparation of a salt. 

 step 1 step 2 step 3 step 4 Which salt is prepared by this method? A barium sulfate 

# B copper(II) sulfate 

 C potassium sulfate D sodium sulfate 

20 Which property of elements increases across a period of the Periodic Table? A metallic character B number of electron shells C number of outer shell electrons D tendency to form positive ions 

21 The noble gases are in Group VIII of the Periodic Table. Which statement explains why noble gases are unreactive? A They all have eight electrons in their outer shells. B They all have full outer shells. C They are all gases. D They are all monoatomic. 

22 Which compound is made from elements which are all in the same period? A Al 2 (SO 4 ) 3 B C 2 H 5 OH C LiNO 3 D Na 3 Al F 6 


© UCLES 2017 0620/12/F/M/17 

23 Part of the Periodic Table is shown. Which element is used as a catalyst? **A** 

## C 

## D 

## B 

24 Which statement about all metals is correct? A They are attracted to a magnet. B They are weak and brittle. C They may be used to form alloys. D They react with water. 

25 Two experiments are carried out. In experiment 1, copper is heated with steam. 

# In experiment 2, copper(II) oxide is heated with carbon. 

 steam 

 copper experiment 1 experiment 2 

 heat 

# copper(II) oxide 

 and carbon 

 Which row describes what happens in experiments 1 and 2? experiment 1 experiment 2 A no reaction no reaction B no reaction reaction C reaction no reaction D reaction reaction 


© UCLES 2017 0620/12/F/M/17 [Turn over 

26 Which metal is commonly used to form alloys with a non-metallic element? A copper B iron C magnesium D zinc 

27 Steel is made by adding ....... 1 ....... to molten iron to remove ....... 2 ....... from the iron. Stainless steel is ....... 3 ....... resistant to corrosion than mild steel. Which words complete the gaps 1, 2 and 3? 1 2 3 A basic oxides acidic impurities less B basic oxides carbon more C oxygen acidic impurities less D oxygen carbon more 

# 28 Water is added to hydrated copper(II) sulfate. 

 water 

 hydrated 

# copper(II) sulfate 

 Which colour change takes place? A blue to pink B blue to white C no change D white to blue 


© UCLES 2017 0620/12/F/M/17 

29 Two reactions, X and Y, produce carbon dioxide. X Y CH 4 CO 2 CaCO 3 Which types of reaction are X and Y? X Y A combustion combustion B combustion thermal decomposition C thermal decomposition combustion D thermal decomposition thermal decomposition 

30 An experiment to find the percentage of oxygen in 150 cm^3 of polluted air is shown. 

 water 

 damp iron wool 

 measuring cylinder 150 cm^3 of polluted air 

 The apparatus is left for one week. After this time, the volume of gas in the measuring cylinder is 122 cm^3. What is the percentage of oxygen, to the nearest whole number, in the polluted air? A 19% B 21% C 28% D 81% 

31 Ammonia is produced when a mixture of ammonium chloride and substance X is heated. What is substance X? A ammonium sulfate B barium chloride C calcium hydroxide D silver nitrate 


© UCLES 2017 0620/12/F/M/17 [Turn over 

32 Which row is correct for both carbon dioxide and methane? 

 causes climate change 

 produced by burning fuels 

 produced by living organisms A    B    C    D    

33 Which statements about sulfur dioxide are correct? 1 It dissolves in water to produce a solution with a pH less than pH 7. 2 It is used as a food preservative. 

# 3 It changes potassium manganate(VII) from colourless to purple. 

 4 It is produced by the combustion of sulfur-containing fossil fuels. A 1, 2 and 3 B 1, 2 and 4 C 1, 3 and 4 D 2, 3 and 4 

34 A student carried out two experiments. experiment 1 The student heated a sample of limestone very strongly. A white powder formed. experiment 2 The white powder from experiment 1 was cooled. The student then added a small quantity of cold water to the powder. Large quantities of steam were produced. Which statement is not correct? A An endothermic reaction occurred in experiment 1. B An exothermic reaction occurred in experiment 2. C Thermal decomposition occurred in experiment 1. D Thermal decomposition occurred in experiment 2. 

35 Which substance has a main constituent that contains only one carbon atom per molecule? A bitumen B gasoline C natural gas D petroleum 


© UCLES 2017 0620/12/F/M/17 

36 The table shows the composition of four different types of petroleum. 

 fraction Arabian Heavy/ % Arabian Light/ % Iranian Heavy/ % North Sea/ % gasoline 18 21 21 23 kerosene 11 15 13 15 diesel oil 18 21 20 24 fuel oil 53 43 46 38 Which type of petroleum is best for the motor vehicle industry? A Arabian Heavy B Arabian Light C Iranian Heavy D North Sea 

37 Ethanol is a fuel used in cars. It can be made from petroleum. C 4 H 10 → C 2 H 4 + C 2 H 6 cracking C 2 H 4 + H 2 O → C 2 H 5 OH producing ethanol C 2 H 5 OH + 3O 2 → 2CO 2 + 3H 2 O burning Compounds of how many homologous series appear in these equations? A 1 B 2 C 3 D 4 

38 Ethanol is produced from either ethene or sugar. Which type of chemical reaction is used in each case? ethene → ethanol sugar → ethanol A addition fermentation B addition fractional distillation C distillation fermentation D distillation fractional distillation 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeInternational Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge LocalExaminations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2017 0620/12/F/M/17 

39 Which type of hydrocarbon reacts rapidly with aqueous bromine and what is the colour change ofthe aqueous bromine? 

 type of hydrocarbon colour change of theaqueous bromine A alkane brown to colourless B alkane colourless to brown C alkene brown to colourless D alkene colourless to brown 

40 The diagram shows the structure of an important product. 

 C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

 This product is formed by …... 1 .….. of an .….. 2 ……. Which words complete gaps 1 and 2? 1 2 A addition polymerisation alkane B addition polymerisation alkene C cracking alkane D cracking alkene 


© UCLES 2017 0620/12/F/M/17 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements^1 Hhydrogen^1 

(^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Beberyllium 9 atomic number atomic symbol **Key**^ name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mgmagnesium 24 19 Kpotassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Srstrontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Gegermanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 22 Tititanium (^4840) Zrzirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rfrutherfordium– 23 Vvanadium (^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Crchromium (^5242) Momolybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sgseaborgium– (^25) Mnmanganese (^5543) Tctechnetium– (^75) Rerhenium (^186107) Bhbohrium– (^26) Feiron (^5644) Ruruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Iriridium (^192109) Mtmeitnerium– (^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pdpalladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Dsdarmstadtium– (^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rgroentgenium– (^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cdcadmium (^11280) Hgmercury (^201112) Cncopernicium– 114 F _l_ flerovium– 116 Lvlivermorium– (^7) Nnitrogen 1415 Pphosphorus (^3133) Asarsenic (^7551) Sbantimony 12283 Bibismuth 209 (^8) Ooxygen 1616 Ssulfur (^3234) Seselenium (^7952) Tetellurium (^12884) Popolonium– (^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Brbromine 8053 I iodine 12785 Atastatine– (^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Scscandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) Lalanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). actinium– (^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium^141 (^91) Paprotactinium 231 (^60) Ndneodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pmpromethium– (^93) Npneptunium– (^62) Smsamarium (^15094) Puplutonium– (^63) Eueuropium (^15295) Amamericium– (^64) Gdgadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bkberkelium– (^66) Dydysprosium 16398 Cfcalifornium– (^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Eseinsteinium– (^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Mdmendelevium– (^70) Ybytterbium (^173102) Nonobelium– (^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lrlawrencium– 


