 This syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 18 printed pages and 2 blank pages. 

 IB18 11_0610_23/4RP © UCLES 2018 [Turn over 

# *6778270274* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## BIOLOGY 0610/23 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) October/November 2018 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2018 0610/23/O/N/18 

**1** The Venus flytrap is a plant that feeds on insects. When a fly lands on the leaf, the leaf folds very quickly and traps the fly. The leaves produce enzymes which digest the fly. 

 Which characteristics of living organisms are involved? 

 A excretion, growth, nutrition 

 B movement, excretion, nutrition 

 C movement, sensitivity, growth 

 D movement, sensitivity, nutrition 

**2** The diagrams show four organisms not drawn to the same scale. 

 Which organism is a prokaryote? 

 A B 

## C D 

 not to scale 

**3** Sunflowers have yellow flowers. 

 Which cell structure is found in sunflower leaves but not in the petals of the flowers? 

 A cell membrane 

 B cell wall 

 C chloroplast 

 D vacuole 


© UCLES 2018 0610/23/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**4** The diagram shows part of a leaf in cross-section. 

## X 

## Y 

 Structures X and Y are both part of the same 

 A cell. 

 B organ. 

 C tissue. 

 D vessel. 

**5** How do carbon dioxide and oxygen move into and out of a mesophyll cell? 

 A active transport 

 B diffusion 

 C respiration 

 D transpiration 

**6** Which process is involved in the uptake of glucose by the epithelial cells of kidney tubules? 

 A active transport 

 B diffusion 

 C osmosis 

 D transpiration 


© UCLES 2018 0610/23/O/N/18 

**7** The data show the concentrations of sugar and starch in an onion. 

 total sugar including reducing sugar / g per 100g 

 starch / g per 100g 

## 3.7 0.0 

 The onion is tested with Benedict’s solution and iodine solution. 

 Which set of results is correct? 

 Benedict’s solution 

 iodine solution 

 A blue blue-black 

 B blue brown 

 C brick red blue-black 

 D brick red brown 

**8** Which processes depend on the fact that water is a solvent? 

 evaporation from the spongy mesophyll cells 

 glucose transported in blood plasma 

 movement of water by osmosis 

 loss of sweat from the skin surface 

## A     

## B     

## C     

## D     


© UCLES 2018 0610/23/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**9** The apparatus shown is used for an experiment on starch digestion. 

 Which test-tube contains the most sugar after 20 minutes? 

 A 

 starch solution and salivary amylase 

 starch solution and salivary amylase 

 starch solution 

 water-bath at 15 °C water-bath at 37 °C 

## B C D 

**10** The graph shows how an enzyme-controlled reaction is affected by temperature. 

## 0 10 20 30 40 50 

## 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 

 rate / arbitrary units 

 temperature / °C 

## X 

## Y 

 Which statement explains the change in activity between X and Y? 

 A There are more effective collisions. 

 B There is a change in the enzyme shape. 

 C There is more substrate present. 

 D The kinetic energy of the molecules has increased. 


© UCLES 2018 0610/23/O/N/18 

**11** An experiment was carried out using the apparatus shown. 

 The carbon dioxide content of the water in each test-tube was measured at the start and again three hours later. 

 In which test-tube would there be a decrease in carbon dioxide content? 

 A B C D 

 black polythene to keep out light 

 water 

 water plant 

 water snail 

 light light light 

**12** Which region in the leaf of a green plant contains phloem? 

 A palisade mesophyll 

 B spongy mesophyll 

 C upper epidermis 

 D vascular bundle 

**13** What is the result of a diet lacking iron? 

 A bleeding gums 

 B poor wound healing 

 C reduced number of red blood cells 

 D weak bones and teeth 


© UCLES 2018 0610/23/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**14** The diagram shows the activity of salivary amylase, pancreatic lipase and stomach protease at different pH levels. 

## 1 2 3 4 5 6 

 pH 

## 7 8 9 10 11 12 

 enzyme activity 

 From the graph, what is the optimum pH for the protease enzyme? 

 A 2.0 B 3.5 C 7.0 D 8.0 

**15** The diagram shows a section through the stem of a dicotyledonous plant. 

 Which part transports water and mineral ions? 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 


© UCLES 2018 0610/23/O/N/18 

**16** Roots and leaves both act as a source and a sink for sucrose and amino acids at different times during the year. 

 At which point in the year are the roots most active as a source? 

## A 

 spring new leaves start to grow 

## B 

 summer leaves are mature 

## D 

 winter no leaves are present 

## C 

 autumn leaves die and fall 

**17** The diagram shows a circulatory system. 

 heart 

## 2 

## 1 

## 3 

## 4 

 capillaries of the lungs 

 capillaries of the rest of the body 

 Which vessels carry oxygenated blood? 

 A 1 and 2 B 1 and 4 C 2 and 3 D 2 and 4 

**18** What happens to the heart valves when the ventricles contract? 

 atrioventricular valves 

 semilunar valves 

 A valves close valves close 

 B valves close valves open 

 C valves open valves close 

 D valves open valves open 


© UCLES 2018 0610/23/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**19** The diagram with the structure labelled X shows a bacterium with proteins on its surface. The diagram labelled Y shows proteins made by the human body. 

## X 

## Y 

 Which row shows the correct combination for destroying the bacterium? 

 name of X name of Y 

 correct shape of Y 

 A antigen antibody 

 B antibody antigen 

 C antigen antibody 

 D antibody antigen 


© UCLES 2018 0610/23/O/N/18 

**20** The graph shows changes in the volume of air in the lungs of a person at rest, over a period of 30 seconds. 

## 0 

## 0 

## 1 

## 2 

## 30 

 time / s 

 volume of air in lungs / dm^3 

 Which graph shows changes in the volume of air in the lungs of the same person immediately after they have done five minutes of vigorous exercise? 

## 0 30 

 time / s 

## A 

## 0 30 

 time / s 

## B 

## 0 30 

 time / s 

## C 

## 0 30 

 time / s 

## D 

## 0 

## 1 

## 2 

 volume of air in lungs / dm^3 

## 0 

## 1 

## 2 

 volume of air in lungs / dm^3 

 0 

## 1 

## 2 

 volume of air in lungs / dm^3 

## 0 

## 1 

## 2 

 volume of air in lungs / dm^3 

**21** Glucose is required for respiration. 

 Which other molecule is required for aerobic respiration? 

 A carbon dioxide 

 B nitrogen 

 C oxygen 

 D water 


© UCLES 2018 0610/23/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**22** Which row correctly shows the organ where each substance is excreted? 

 carbon dioxide excess water salts urea 

 A kidneys liver lungs lungs 

 B liver liver liver skin 

 C lungs kidneys kidneys kidneys 

 D lungs kidneys liver skin 

**23** The diagram shows the appearance of the iris and pupil in three different light conditions. 

 pupil 

 iris 

## 1 2 3 

 Which row shows the size of the pupil of the eye in each light condition? 

 no light 

 moderate light 

 bright light 

 A 1 2 3 

 B 1 3 2 

 C 2 1 3 

 D 3 2 1 


© UCLES 2018 0610/23/O/N/18 

**24** A student used two seedlings X and Y to investigate phototropism. 

 The diagram shows their investigation. 

## X 

 at the start of the experiment 

 piece of glass 

 light 

## X 

 after some time no curvature towards light 

 piece of glass 

 light 

## Y 

 at the start of the experiment 

 light 

## Y 

 after some time gives curvature towards light 

 piece of glass piece of glass 

 light 

 Which statement explains the difference in results between X and Y? 

 A The piece of glass destroyed the auxin on the shaded side of the seedling. 

 B The piece of glass destroyed the auxin on the side of the seedling facing the light. 

 C The piece of glass in X stopped the auxin travelling down the shaded side of the seedling. 

 D The piece of glass in X stopped the auxin travelling down the side of the seedling facing the light. 

**25** In a mammal, body temperature is regulated by negative feedback. 

 As a result of negative feedback, what happens in the mammal’s body as the temperature of the external environment decreases? 

 A relaxation of hair erector muscles 

 B sweating 

 C vasoconstriction 

 D vasodilation 


© UCLES 2018 0610/23/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**26** The graph shows the number of cases of MRSA in one country between 2001 and 2006. 

 8000 

 7250 

 6500 

 5750 

 5000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 

 year 

 number of cases of MRSA 

 Between which years was the greatest change in the number of cases of MRSA seen? 

 A 2002 and 2003 

 B 2003 and 2004 

 C 2004 and 2005 

 D 2005 and 2006 

**27** Pollen grains are transferred from the anthers to the stigma. The pollen grains adhere to the sticky stigma. The statements describe what happens next. 

 1 The pollen grain grows a pollen tube. 

 2 The pollen tube enters the ovule. 

 3 The pollen tube grows down the style. 

 4 The male nucleus fuses with an egg cell nucleus. 

 In which order do these stages occur? 

 A 1 → 2 → 4 → 3 

 B 1 → 3 → 2 → 4 

 C 2 → 3 → 1 → 4 

 D 3 → 1 → 4 → 2 


© UCLES 2018 0610/23/O/N/18 

**28** The diagram shows a woman’s menstrual cycle. 

 day 0 

 day 28 

 bleeding starts 

 bleeding stops 

## P Q R S 

 On which day does ovulation occur, and on which day could fertilisation occur? 

 ovulation fertilisation 

 A P R 

 B P S 

 C Q R 

 D Q S 

**29** Which method of contraception could also help prevent the spread of HIV? 

 A condom 

 B contraceptive pill 

 C monitoring cervical mucus 

 D vasectomy 

**30** Which name is given to different versions of a gene? 

 A allele 

 B chromosome 

 C length of DNA 

 D protein 

**31** Which feature of meiosis ensures that the zygote is diploid? 

 A Chromosomes are duplicated. 

 B Four gametes are formed. 

 C Genetically different gametes are formed. 

 D Haploid gametes are formed. 


© UCLES 2018 0610/23/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**32** Which genotypes result in a person having blood group A? 

 A IAIA^ and IAIB^ B IAIA^ and IAIo^ C IAIo^ and IoIo^ D IAIo^ and IAIB 

**33** The diagram shows a plant reproducing asexually by growing a plantlet from a runner. The leaves of the plantlet appear different to the leaves of the parent plant. 

 plantlet 

 runner 

 parent plant 

 Which statement explains the difference in the leaf shape of the plantlet? 

 A A mutation has occurred in the genes of the plantlet. 

 B The plantlet inherited the genes from the parent plant. 

 C The plant was produced by meiosis. 

 D The plantlet was produced by the fusion of gametes. 

**34** What results from the process of natural selection and adaptation? 

 A artificial selection 

 B evolution 

 C reproduction 

 D selective breeding 


© UCLES 2018 0610/23/O/N/18 

**35** The diagram shows a food web in the ocean. 

 shark 

 penguin seal 

 krill herring 

 algae 

 Which two animals are secondary and tertiary consumers? 

 A penguin and herring 

 B penguin and shark 

 C seal and penguin 

 D seal and shark 


© UCLES 2018 0610/23/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**36** A student was given data on the change in the number of insects in a population over a period of twelve weeks. The student was asked to name and label each phase. 

## 13 

## 12 

## 11 

## 10 

## 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 

 number of insects / thousand 

## 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 

 time / weeks 

## 7 8 9 10 11 12 

 phase one phase two phase three 

 What is the correct label for phase three? 

 A death phase 

 B exponential (log) phase 

 C lag phase 

 D stationary phase 

**37** Insulin is now produced using genetically modified bacteria. Previously, diabetics were given insulin extracted from the pancreas of animals. 

 Why is the insulin from bacteria regarded as a better ethical choice? 

 A insulin is produced from bacterial DNA 

 B it is accepted by vegetarians 

 C plasmids are involved 

 D the genetic code is shared 


© UCLES 2018 0610/23/O/N/18 

**38** Plasmids are often used in genetic engineering. 

 What is a plasmid? 

 A bacterial cell 

 B gene 

 C loop of DNA 

 D protein 

**39** The diagram shows a food web in a woodland. 

 tree type X 

 snails caterpillars 

 blackbirds 

 hawks 

 hedgehogs sparrows hornets 

 tree type Y 

 What is most likely to happen if all of tree type X is removed by humans? 

 A The carbon dioxide concentration in the woodland will decrease. 

 B The population of hedgehogs will increase. 

 C The population of hornets will increase. 

 D The population of sparrows will decrease. 

**40** The increased availability of nitrates in rivers and lakes can result in the death of fish. 

 Which statement explains why fish die in rivers and lakes containing a high concentration of nitrates? 

 A The increase in water plants stops the fish swimming. 

 B There is an increase in anaerobic respiration by plants. 

 C There are fewer water plants for fish to eat. 

 D There is an increase in aerobic respiration by decomposers. 


## BLANK PAGE 

© UCLES 2018 0610/23/O/N/18 


## BLANK PAGE 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2018 0610/23/O/N/18 


