 This syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 18 printed pages and 2 blank pages. 

 IB18 11_0610_22/3RP © UCLES 2018 [Turn over 

# *3397490337 

# * 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## BIOLOGY 0610/22 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) October/November 2018 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2018 0610/22/O/N/18 

**1** A person drinks a glass of iced water and the volume of sweat they secrete decreases. 

 This is an example of which characteristic of living organisms? 

 A growth 

 B movement 

 C respiration 

 D sensitivity 

**2** Lichens are formed from two different organisms living together. 

 The table shows some of the characteristics of two organisms, X and Y, found in most lichens. 

## X Y 

 made of strands called hyphae single celled 

 hyphae have cell walls and many nuclei 

 cell contains a nucleus and chloroplasts 

 Which kingdoms are represented by X and Y? 

## X Y 

 A Fungus Plant 

 B Fungus Protoctist 

 C Protoctist Fungus 

 D Protoctist Plant 

**3** Two types of cell, one animal and one plant, were examined using a light microscope. 

 Which row shows the correct combination of cellular features that would be observed in the cells? 

 cell structure observed 

 animal cell plant cell 

 A chloroplast membrane vacuole cytoplasm 

 B cytoplasm nucleus chloroplast membrane 

 C membrane cell wall cytoplasm nucleus 

 D nucleus chloroplast cell wall membrane 


© UCLES 2018 0610/22/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**4** The diagram shows part of a leaf in cross-section. 

## X 

## Y 

 Structures X and Y are both part of the same 

 A cell. 

 B organ. 

 C tissue. 

 D vessel. 

**5** How do carbon dioxide and oxygen move into and out of a mesophyll cell? 

 A active transport 

 B diffusion 

 C respiration 

 D transpiration 


© UCLES 2018 0610/22/O/N/18 

**6** The diagram shows a plant cell after it has been submerged in a solution, P, for 20 minutes. 

 Which row describes the water potential of solution P and the condition of the cell? 

 water potential of solution P condition of the cell 

 A higher than the cell sap in the vacuole plasmolysed and turgid 

 B higher than the cell sap in the vacuole under high turgor pressure 

 C lower than the cell sap in the vacuole plasmolysed and flaccid 

 D the same as the cell sap in the vacuole under low turgor pressure 

**7** The data show the concentrations of sugar and starch in an onion. 

 total sugar including reducing sugar / g per 100g 

 starch / g per 100g 

## 3.7 0.0 

 The onion is tested with Benedict’s solution and iodine solution. 

 Which set of results is correct? 

 Benedict’s solution 

 iodine solution 

 A blue blue-black 

 B blue brown 

 C brick red blue-black 

 D brick red brown 

**8** The base sequence of part of one strand of a DNA molecule is shown. 

 ATAGCC 

 What is the base sequence of the other strand? 

 A GCGATT B CGCTAA C TATCGG D ATAGCC 


© UCLES 2018 0610/22/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**9** The apparatus shown is used for an experiment on starch digestion. 

 Which test-tube contains the most sugar after 20 minutes? 

 A 

 starch solution and salivary amylase 

 starch solution and salivary amylase 

 starch solution 

 water-bath at 15 °C water-bath at 37 °C 

## B C D 

**10** The graph shows the effect of temperature on the action of an enzyme. 

 enzyme activity 

 temperature / °C 

## 0 20 40 60 80 

 Why does the rate of reaction change when the temperature is increased from 20 °C to 30 °C? 

 more kinetic energy of particles 

 more frequent collisions of particles 

 A   

 B   

 C   

 D   


© UCLES 2018 0610/22/O/N/18 

**11** An experiment was carried out using the apparatus shown. 

 The carbon dioxide content of the water in each test-tube was measured at the start and again three hours later. 

 In which test-tube would there be a decrease in carbon dioxide content? 

 A B C D 

 black polythene to keep out light 

 water 

 water plant 

 water snail 

 light light light 

**12** The diagram shows the structure of cells from the leaf of a plant. 

 What type of cells are they? 

 A epidermal cells 

 B guard cells 

 C palisade cells 

 D spongy cells 

**13** What is the result of a diet lacking iron? 

 A bleeding gums 

 B poor wound healing 

 C reduced number of red blood cells 

 D weak bones and teeth 


© UCLES 2018 0610/22/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**14** Which row shows an enzyme with the correct site of production and products? 

enzyme (^) produced byenzyme of digestionproduct(s) **A** amylase salivary glands amino acids **B** amylase stomach sugar **C** protease salivary glands sugar **D** protease stomach amino acids **15** The diagram shows a plant cell. What type of plant cell is this? **A** guard cell **B** mesophyll cell **C** root cortex cell **D** root hair cell 


© UCLES 2018 0610/22/O/N/18 

**16** Roots and leaves both act as a source and a sink for sucrose and amino acids at different times during the year. 

 At which point in the year are the roots most active as a source? 

## A 

 spring new leaves start to grow 

## B 

 summer leaves are mature 

## D 

 winter no leaves are present 

## C 

 autumn leaves die and fall 

**17** The diagram shows a circulatory system. 

 heart 

## 2 

## 1 

## 3 

## 4 

 capillaries of the lungs 

 capillaries of the rest of the body 

 Which vessels carry oxygenated blood? 

 A 1 and 2 B 1 and 4 C 2 and 3 D 2 and 4 

**18** What happens to the heart valves when the ventricles contract? 

 atrioventricular valves 

 semilunar valves 

 A valves close valves close 

 B valves close valves open 

 C valves open valves close 

 D valves open valves open 


© UCLES 2018 0610/22/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**19** The diagram with the structure labelled X shows a bacterium with proteins on its surface. The diagram labelled Y shows proteins made by the human body. 

## X 

## Y 

 Which row shows the correct combination for destroying the bacterium? 

 name of X name of Y 

 correct shape of Y 

 A antigen antibody 

 B antibody antigen 

 C antigen antibody 

 D antibody antigen 


© UCLES 2018 0610/22/O/N/18 

**20** The graph shows changes in the volume of air in the lungs of a person at rest, over a period of 30 seconds. 

## 0 

## 0 

## 1 

## 2 

## 30 

 time / s 

 volume of air in lungs / dm^3 

 Which graph shows changes in the volume of air in the lungs of the same person immediately after they have done five minutes of vigorous exercise? 

## 0 30 

 time / s 

## A 

## 0 30 

 time / s 

## B 

## 0 30 

 time / s 

## C 

## 0 30 

 time / s 

## D 

## 0 

## 1 

## 2 

 volume of air in lungs / dm^3 

## 0 

## 1 

## 2 

 volume of air in lungs / dm^3 

 0 

## 1 

## 2 

 volume of air in lungs / dm^3 

## 0 

## 1 

## 2 

 volume of air in lungs / dm^3 

**21** As we breathe out, ......1...... is ......2...... through the lungs. 

 Which words correctly complete gaps 1 and 2? 

## 1 2 

 A carbon dioxide excreted 

 B carbon dioxide respired 

 C oxygen excreted 

 D oxygen respired 


© UCLES 2018 0610/22/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**22** A person carries out vigorous exercise without drinking any water. 

 What would happen to the concentration and volume of the person’s urine immediately after exercise? 

 urine concentration 

 urine volume 

 A decrease decrease 

 B decrease increase 

 C increase decrease 

 D increase increase 

**23** What does the central nervous system consist of? 

 A brain, spinal cord and peripheral nerves 

 B brain and spinal cord only 

 C brain only 

 D spinal cord and peripheral nerves only 


© UCLES 2018 0610/22/O/N/18 

**24** A student used two seedlings X and Y to investigate phototropism. 

 The diagram shows their investigation. 

## X 

 at the start of the experiment 

 piece of glass 

 light 

## X 

 after some time no curvature towards light 

 piece of glass 

 light 

## Y 

 at the start of the experiment 

 light 

## Y 

 after some time gives curvature towards light 

 piece of glass piece of glass 

 light 

 Which statement explains the difference in results between X and Y? 

 A The piece of glass destroyed the auxin on the shaded side of the seedling. 

 B The piece of glass destroyed the auxin on the side of the seedling facing the light. 

 C The piece of glass in X stopped the auxin travelling down the shaded side of the seedling. 

 D The piece of glass in X stopped the auxin travelling down the side of the seedling facing the light. 

**25** What is a response to a low concentration of glucose in the blood? 

 A Glucagon will cause the body to convert glucose into glycogen. 

 B Glucagon will cause the body to convert glycogen into glucose. 

 C Insulin will cause the body to convert glucose into glycogen. 

 D Insulin will cause the body to convert glycogen into glucose. 


© UCLES 2018 0610/22/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**26** The graph shows the number of cases of MRSA in one country between 2001 and 2006. 

 8000 

 7250 

 6500 

 5750 

 5000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 

 year 

 number of cases of MRSA 

 Between which years was the greatest change in the number of cases of MRSA seen? 

 A 2002 and 2003 

 B 2003 and 2004 

 C 2004 and 2005 

 D 2005 and 2006 

**27** What are two adaptive features of a human sperm cell? 

 1 jelly coat present 

 2 relatively high number of mitochondria 

 3 acrosome present 

 4 relatively high energy stores 

 A 1 and 2 B 1 and 4 C 2 and 3 D 3 and 4 

**28** Which hormone maintains the thickness of the lining of the uterus during pregnancy? 

 A follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) 

 B luteinising hormone (LH) 

 C oestrogen 

 D progesterone 

**29** What is a possible disadvantage of in vitro fertilisation (IVF)? 

 A Donated eggs and sperm can be used. 

 B Embryos can be screened for genetic disorders. 

 C It requires more medical resources. 

 D Unused embryos can be stored. 


© UCLES 2018 0610/22/O/N/18 

**30** A sperm cell from a domestic cat contains 19 chromosomes. 

 If this cell fertilises an egg, which zygote is produced? 

 A diploid, with 19 chromosomes 

 B diploid, with 38 chromosomes 

 C haploid, with 19 chromosomes 

 D haploid, with 38 chromosomes 

**31** The diagram shows a cell of an organism. The nucleus contains 12 chromosomes. 

 After it divides by mitosis, how many chromosomes would be present in one of the daughter cells? 

 A 6 B 12 C 18 D 24 

**32** Pure-breeding black-feathered chickens are mated with pure-breeding white-feathered chickens. All of the individuals in the offspring in the F1 generation have both black and white feathers. 

 What will be the ratio of offspring phenotypes when two of the F1 generation chickens are crossed? 

 A 1 black : 1 white 

 B 1 black : 2 black and white : 1 white 

 C 3 white : 1 black 

 D 3 black : 1 white 


© UCLES 2018 0610/22/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**33** The diagram shows the bases on part of a chromosome, P, responsible for the production of normal haemoglobin. The same part of another chromosome, Q, is responsible for the production of sickle-cell haemoglobin. 

## G 

## C 

## A 

## T 

 chromosome P 

## G 

## C 

## G 

## C 

## T 

## A 

 chromosome Q 

## G 

## C 

 What has caused the difference between the two chromosomes? 

 A discontinuous variation 

 B gene mutation 

 C phenotypic variation 

 D selective breeding 

**34** Farmers have bred Holstein-Friesian cattle to produce more milk than older breeds of cattle. 

 Which process was used to produce these cattle? 

 A adaptation 

 B genetic engineering 

 C natural selection 

 D selective breeding 


© UCLES 2018 0610/22/O/N/18 

**35** The diagram shows a food web. 

 hedgehog 

 greenfly 

 caterpillar 

 rose plant cabbage plant 

 beetle 

 robin 

 Which row shows a food chain in this food web? 

producer (^) consumerprimary secondaryconsumer **A** hedgehog caterpillar robin **B** cabbage plant greenfly beetle **C** cabbage plant beetle robin **D** rose plant hedgehog greenfly **36** The diagram shows part of the nitrogen cycle. Which change is caused by the action of denitrifying bacteria? plants nitrogen gas in the air animals nitrate in the soil faeces and urine feeding death death 

## B 

## C 

## D A 


© UCLES 2018 0610/22/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**37** The diagram shows an industrial fermenter used to produce penicillin. 

## X 

 What is a function of the part labelled X? 

 A add oxygen to the solution 

 B maintain an even temperature throughout the solution 

 C record the pH of the solution 

 D sterilise the solution 

**38** Genetic engineering involves various stages. 

 1 human DNA is inserted into bacterial plasmid DNA 

 2 recombinant plasmid inserted into bacteria 

 3 restriction enzyme cuts bacterial plasmid DNA 

 4 restriction enzyme cuts human DNA 

 What is the correct sequence for genetic engineering? 

 A 1 → 2 → 4 → 3 

 B 2 → 3 → 4 → 1 

 C 3 → 2 → 4 → 1 

 D 4 → 3 → 1 → 2 


© UCLES 2018 0610/22/O/N/18 

**39** The statements describe some of the events that occur during eutrophication. 

 What is directly responsible for the increase in bacteria? 

 A a decrease in dissolved oxygen concentration 

 B an increase in nitrate concentration 

 C an increase in the population of algae 

 D an increase in the death of producers 

**40** In 1991 there were only fourteen _Daviesia cunderdin_ plants. 

 What happens to a plant population that becomes very small? 

 A Each plant will produce fewer offspring. 

 B Each plant will produce more offspring. 

 C Variation in the population is increased. 

 D Variation in the population is reduced. 


## BLANK PAGE 

© UCLES 2018 0610/22/O/N/18 


## BLANK PAGE 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2018 0610/22/O/N/18 


