 This syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 17 printed pages and 3 blank pages. 

 IB18 11_0610_13/3RP © UCLES 2018 [Turn over 

# *9885623081* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## BIOLOGY 0610/13 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) October/November 2018 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2018 0610/13/O/N/18 

**1** Which process occurs both in plants and in animals? 

 A excretion 

 B phagocytosis 

 C photosynthesis 

 D transpiration 

**2** What does the term _species_ mean? 

 A a group of animals that reproduce asexually 

 B a group of organisms that can reproduce to produce fertile offspring 

 C a group of plants that reproduce to produce fertile offspring 

 D a group of vertebrates that reproduce sexually 

**3** Woodlice are arthropods with 14 jointed legs. 

 To which arthropod class do they belong? 

 A arachnids 

 B crustaceans 

 C insects 

 D myriapods 

**4** Sunflowers have yellow flowers. 

 Which cell structure is found in sunflower leaves but not in the petals of the flowers? 

 A cell membrane 

 B cell wall 

 C chloroplast 

 D vacuole 


© UCLES 2018 0610/13/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**5** The diagram shows part of a leaf in cross-section. 

## X 

## Y 

 Structures X and Y are both part of the same 

 A cell. 

 B organ. 

 C tissue. 

 D vessel. 

**6** A bacterial cell has a length of 40 mm when it is magnified by × 20 000. 

 What is the actual length of the bacterial cell? 

 A 0.0002 mm B 0.002 mm C 0.02 mm D 0.2 mm 

**7** How do carbon dioxide and oxygen move into and out of a mesophyll cell? 

 A active transport 

 B diffusion 

 C respiration 

 D transpiration 


© UCLES 2018 0610/13/O/N/18 

**8** The diagram shows four identical pieces of potato in test-tubes. The potato pieces were left as shown for six hours. 

 Which piece of potato would have the greatest increase in mass? 

 A B C D 

 distilled water 5% sugar solution 

 20% sugar solution 

 air 

**9** The data show the concentrations of sugar and starch in an onion. 

 total sugar including reducing sugar / g per 100g 

 starch / g per 100g 

## 3.7 0.0 

 The onion is tested with Benedict’s solution and iodine solution. 

 Which set of results is correct? 

 Benedict’s solution 

 iodine solution 

 A blue blue-black 

 B blue brown 

 C brick red blue-black 

 D brick red brown 


© UCLES 2018 0610/13/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**10** The apparatus shown is used for an experiment on starch digestion. 

 Which test-tube contains the most sugar after 20 minutes? 

 A 

 starch solution and salivary amylase 

 starch solution and salivary amylase 

 starch solution 

 water-bath at 15 °C water-bath at 37 °C 

## B C D 

**11** An experiment was carried out using the apparatus shown. 

 The carbon dioxide content of the water in each test-tube was measured at the start and again three hours later. 

 In which test-tube would there be a decrease in carbon dioxide content? 

 A B C D 

 black polythene to keep out light 

 water 

 water plant 

 water snail 

 light light light 


© UCLES 2018 0610/13/O/N/18 

**12** The diagram shows a cross-section of a leaf. 

## X 

## Y 

## Z 

 Which row shows the correct labels? 

 palisade mesophyll cell 

 spongy mesophyll cell stoma 

 A X Y Z 

 B X Z Y 

 C Y X Z 

 D Y Z X 

**13** What is the result of a diet lacking iron? 

 A bleeding gums 

 B poor wound healing 

 C reduced number of red blood cells 

 D weak bones and teeth 


© UCLES 2018 0610/13/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**14** The diagram shows the activity of salivary amylase, pancreatic lipase and stomach protease at different pH levels. 

## 1 2 3 4 5 6 

 pH 

## 7 8 9 10 11 12 

 enzyme activity 

 From the graph, what is the optimum pH for the protease enzyme? 

 A 2.0 B 3.5 C 7.0 D 8.0 

**15** The diagram shows a section through the stem of a dicotyledonous plant. 

 Which part transports water and mineral ions? 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 


© UCLES 2018 0610/13/O/N/18 

**16** The diagram shows two shoots at the start of an experiment on transpiration. 

 30 g 

 spring balance 

 oil 

 water 

 shoot X shoot Y 

 30 g 

 What are the likely readings on the spring balances after three days? 

 shoot X / g shoot Y / g 

 A 25 25 

 B 25 30 

 C 30 25 

 D 30 30 

**17** The diagram shows a circulatory system. 

 heart 

## 2 

## 1 

## 3 

## 4 

 capillaries of the lungs 

 capillaries of the rest of the body 

 Which vessels carry oxygenated blood? 

 A 1 and 2 B 1 and 4 C 2 and 3 D 2 and 4 


© UCLES 2018 0610/13/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**18** The body’s first line of defence can prevent some pathogens from entering the body. 

 Which is a first line of defence? 

 A antibody production 

 B mucus 

 C phagocytosis 

 D vaccination 

**19** The graph shows changes in the volume of air in the lungs of a person at rest, over a period of 30 seconds. 

## 0 

## 0 

## 1 

## 2 

## 30 

 time / s 

 volume of air in lungs / dm^3 

 Which graph shows changes in the volume of air in the lungs of the same person immediately after they have done five minutes of vigorous exercise? 

## 0 30 

 time / s 

## A 

## 0 30 

 time / s 

## B 

## 0 30 

 time / s 

## C 

## 0 30 

 time / s 

## D 

## 0 

## 1 

## 2 

 volume of air in lungs / dm^3 

## 0 

## 1 

## 2 

 volume of air in lungs / dm^3 

 0 

## 1 

## 2 

 volume of air in lungs / dm^3 

## 0 

## 1 

## 2 

 volume of air in lungs / dm^3 


© UCLES 2018 0610/13/O/N/18 

**20** Glucose is required for respiration. 

 Which other molecule is required for aerobic respiration? 

 A carbon dioxide 

 B nitrogen 

 C oxygen 

 D water 

**21** Which row correctly shows the organ where each substance is excreted? 

 carbon dioxide excess water salts urea 

 A kidneys liver lungs lungs 

 B liver liver liver skin 

 C lungs kidneys kidneys kidneys 

 D lungs kidneys liver skin 

**22** The diagram shows a reflex arc. 

 Which label points to the sensory neurone? 

**A** (^) **B** 

## C 

 hot pan 

## D 


© UCLES 2018 0610/13/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**23** The diagram shows the appearance of the iris and pupil in three different light conditions. 

 pupil 

 iris 

## 1 2 3 

 Which row shows the size of the pupil of the eye in each light condition? 

 no light 

 moderate light 

 bright light 

 A 1 2 3 

 B 1 3 2 

 C 2 1 3 

 D 3 2 1 

**24** Some possible effects of injecting substances are listed. 

 1 It can cause addiction. 

 2 It can provide immunity to a disease. 

 3 It can cause HIV infection if needles are shared. 

 4 It can improve reaction times. 

 Which effects are associated with injecting heroin? 

 A 1 and 3 B 1 and 4 C 2 and 3 D 2 and 4 

**25** When asexual reproduction takes place, there will always be 

 A fertilisation. 

 B offspring genetically different from parent. 

 C only one parent required. 

 D production of a pollen tube. 


© UCLES 2018 0610/13/O/N/18 

**26** The diagram shows the female reproductive system. 

 Where does implantation normally occur? 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 

**27** Which precautions could help to prevent the spread of AIDS? 

 1 avoiding the mixing of blood 

 2 using a femidom 

 3 using the contraceptive pill 

 4 using a condom 

 A 1 and 3 B 1, 2 and 4 C 2, 3 and 4 D 2 and 4 only 


© UCLES 2018 0610/13/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**28** The diagram shows a timeline of a woman’s menstrual cycle, which lasts for 28 days. 

(^21) 

## 3 

## 4 

## 5 

## 6 

## 7 

## 8 

## 9 

## 10 

## 11 

## 12 

(^13 14 15 16) 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 28 27 menstruation (period) On which days of the menstrual cycle is a woman most likely to become pregnant? **A** days 1– 4 **B** days 7–10 **C** days 13–16 **D** days 20–23 **29** Which name is given to different versions of a gene? **A** allele **B** chromosome **C** length of DNA **D** protein **30** Which cells in the human body are produced by meiosis? **A** egg cells **B** muscle cells **C** nerve cells **D** white blood cells 


© UCLES 2018 0610/13/O/N/18 

**31** Two pea plants with white flowers are crossed. Some of the offspring pea plants have red flowers and some have white flowers. 

 Which statement about the parent pea plants is correct? 

 A Both parents are heterozygous. 

 B Both parents are homozygous. 

 C One parent is heterozygous and one parent is homozygous. 

 D The white allele for flower colour is recessive. 

**32** The diagram shows a plant reproducing asexually by growing a plantlet from a runner. The leaves of the plantlet appear different to the leaves of the parent plant. 

 plantlet 

 runner 

 parent plant 

 Which statement explains the difference in the leaf shape of the plantlet? 

 A A mutation has occurred in the genes of the plantlet. 

 B The plantlet inherited the genes from the parent plant. 

 C The plant was produced by meiosis. 

 D The plantlet was produced by the fusion of gametes. 

**33** Part of the process of natural selection is described. 

 Organisms produce many ......1......, which results in competition for ......2....... This means that organisms struggle for ......3....... 

 Which row correctly completes gaps 1, 2 and 3? 

## 1 2 3 

 A offspring survival resources 

 B offspring resources survival 

 C resources survival offspring 

 D resources offspring survival 


© UCLES 2018 0610/13/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**34** Which organism in the food chain shown uses light energy? 

 green plant chicken rat cobra 

## A B C D 

**35** What is the definition of a food chain? 

 A a line of different living things 

 B taking in the Sun’s energy 

 C the process of one living thing ingesting another living thing 

 D the transfer of energy from one organism to the next, beginning with a producer 

**36** Elk are mammals and they are herbivores. 

 The graph shows the total number of elk in a national park between 1978 and 2008. 

## 1978198019821984198619881990199219941996199820002002200420062008 

 year 

 total number of elk 

## 700 

## 600 

## 500 

## 400 

## 300 

## 200 

## 100 

## 0 

 What is a possible explanation for the change in the elk population between 1998 and 2000? 

 A decrease in disease 

 B decrease in hunting 

 C increase in food source 

 D increase in predation 


© UCLES 2018 0610/13/O/N/18 

**37** Bacteria have the following features. 

 1 the ability to make complex molecules 

 2 the ability to reproduce quickly 

 3 have a cell membrane 

 4 have cytoplasm 

 Which features make bacteria useful in biotechnology? 

 A 1, 2, 3 and 4 

 B 1, 2 and 3 only 

 C 1 and 2 only 

 D 1 only 

**38** Some washing powders contain enzymes as well as detergent. 

 In an experiment, three pieces of cloth were stained with the same substance. They were left in different beakers of detergent, some with added enzyme, at 40 °C for 30 minutes. 

 detergent 

 beaker 

 cloth 

 black stain 

 at the start of the experiment 

 after 30 minutes at 40 °C 

 detergent only 

 detergent and lipase 

 detergent and protease 

 Which statement is correct for the results shown by this experiment? 

 A The black stain contained carbohydrate. 

 B The black stain contained fat. 

 C The black stain contained protein. 

 D The black stain contained water. 


© UCLES 2018 0610/13/O/N/18 

**39** Which activity is the **least** likely source of pollution? 

 farmer spraying fields with insecticide farmer spraying fields with herbicide 

 B sewage treatment works 

## A 

 direction of flow of stream 

 C stream 

 field sprayed with fertiliser just before heavy rainfall 

## D 

 direction of water flow 

**40** What is used in the conservation of species? 

 A deforestation 

 B moving species to different habitats 

 C seed banks 

 D selective breeding 


## BLANK PAGE 

© UCLES 2018 0610/13/O/N/18 


## BLANK PAGE 

© UCLES 2018 0610/13/O/N/18 


## BLANK PAGE 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2018 0610/13/O/N/18 


