# Cambridge IGCSE™ 

* 3 5 7 4 9 8 4 6 3 1 * 

 DC (PQ/CB) 183937/5 © UCLES 2020 [Turn over 

 This document has 16 pages. Blank pages are indicated. 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/21 

 Paper 2 May/June 2020 

 2 hours 

 You must answer on the question paper. 

 No additional materials are needed. 

 INSTRUCTIONS ● Answer all questions. ● Use a black or dark blue pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. ● Write your name, centre number and candidate number in the boxes at the top of the page. ● Write your answer to each question in the space provided. ● Do not use an erasable pen or correction fluid. ● Do not write on any bar codes. ● You should use a calculator where appropriate. ● You must show all necessary working clearly; no marks will be given for unsupported answers from a calculator. ● Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place for angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. 

 INFORMATION ● The total mark for this paper is 80. ● The number of marks for each question or part question is shown in brackets [ ]. 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/21/M/J/20** 

 Mathematical Formulae 

**1. ALGEBRA** 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0 , 

_x_ (^) _a b b ac_ 2 

## !^24 

## = 

## 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

 ( a b ) a a b a b a b 

 n n n r 

 b 1 2 

 +^ n^ = n^ + e^ o^ n^ -^1 + e^ o^ n^ -^2 2 + f + eo n^ r^ r^ +f+ n 

where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( !)!! _n r n_^ _r_^ _r_ =^ _n_ 

- 

 e o 

_Arithmetic series u_ (^) _n_ = _a_ + ( _n_ 1 ) _d S_ (^) _n_ = 21 _n a_ ( + _l_ ) = 21 _n_ { 2 _a_ + ( _n_ 1 ) _d_ } _Geometric series u_ (^) _n_ = _arn_^ -^1 ( ) _S_ (^) _r_ ( ) _a r_ 1 _r_ 

## 1 

 n^1 

 n 

= (^) -! 

## 

_S_ (^) 3 = 1 _a_ -^ _r_ ( _r_ 11 ) 

**2. TRIGONOMETRY** 

_Identities_ 

 sin 2 A + cos^2 A = 1 sec 2 A = 1 +tan^2 A cos ec 2 A^ = 1 +cot^2 A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC_ 

 sin A sin sin 

 a B 

 b C 

 = = c 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 2 bc cos A 

 T = 21 bc sin A 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/21/M/J/20 [Turn over** 

**1** Variables _x_ and _y_ are such that, when 4 _y_ is plotted against (^) _x_^1 ,a straight line graph passing through the points (0.5, 9) and (3, 34) is obtained. Find _y_ as a function of _x_. [4] **2 (a)** Write 9 _x_^2 12 _x_ + 5 in the form _p x_ ( _q_ ) 2 + _r_ ,where _p_ , _q_ and _r_ are constants. [3] **(b)** Hence write down the coordinates of the minimum point of the curve _y_ = 9 _x_^2 12 _x_ + 5. [1] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/21/M/J/20** 

## 3 DO NOT USE A CALCULATOR IN THIS QUESTION. 

 p ( ) x = 15 x^3 + 22 x^2 15 x + 2 

 (a) Find the remainder when p( ) x is divided by x + 1. [2] 

 (b) (i) Show that x + 2 is a factor of p( ) x. [1] 

 (ii) Write p( ) x as a product of linear factors. [3] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/21/M/J/20 [Turn over** 

**4 (a)** In an examination, candidates must select 2 questions from the 5 questions in section A and select 4 questions from the 8 questions in section B. Find the number of ways in which this can be done. [2] 

 (b) The digits of the number 6 378 129 are to be arranged so that the resulting 7-digit number is even. Find the number of ways in which this can be done. [2] 

**5** The vectors **a** and **b** are such that (^) **a** = _a_ **i** + **j** and **b** = 12 **i** + _b_ **j**. **(a)** Find the value of each of the constants _a_ and _b_ such that 4 **a** **b** = ( _a_ + 3 ) **i** 2 **j**. [3] **(b)** Hence find the unit vector in the direction of **b** 4 **a**. [2] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/21/M/J/20** 

**6** Find the values of _k_ for which the line _y_ = _kx_ 7 and the curve _y_ = 3 _x_^2 + 8 _x_ + 5 do not intersect. [6] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/21/M/J/20 [Turn over** 

**7 (a)** Solve the simultaneous equations 

 10 x^ +^2 y^ = 5 , 10 3 x^^ +^4 y^ = 50 , 

 giving x and y in exact simplified form. [4] 

 (b) Solve 2 x^3 x 10 0. 

 2 3 

 1 

- - = [3] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/21/M/J/20** 

**8 (a)** Expand ( 2 _x_ ) ,^5 simplifying each coefficient. [3] 

 (b) Hence solve e 

 e (^ x )^ e x e. x 

(^2 80) _x_ 10 32 5 4 

## # 5 

## = 

-     + 

(^) [4] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/21/M/J/20 [Turn over** 

**9** A particle travels in a straight line. As it passes through a fixed point _O_ , the particle is travelling at a velocity of 3 ms –1. The particle continues at this velocity for 60 seconds then decelerates at a constant rate for 15 seconds to a velocity of 1.6 ms–1. The particle then decelerates again at a constant rate for 5 seconds to reach point _A_ , where it stops. 

 (a) Sketch the velocity-time graph for this journey on the axes below. [3] 

## O 

 v ms–1 

 t s 

 (b) Find the distance between O and A. [3] 

 (c) Find the deceleration in the last 5 seconds. [1] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/21/M/J/20** 

## 10 

## O 

 y 

 x 

 y = ( x 3 ) 2 y 4 x 3 

 2 = 

 B b ( , 4 ) 

 A a ( , 0 ) 

 The diagram shows part of the graphs of y 4 x 3 

 2 = and y = ( x 3 ) 2. The graph of y = ( x 3 ) 2 meets the x -axis at the point A ( a , 0) and the two graphs intersect at the point B ( b , 4). 

 (a) Find the value of a and of b. [2] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/21/M/J/20 [Turn over** 

 (b) Find the area of the shaded region. [5] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/21/M/J/20** 

**11** The function f is defined by f ( ) _x_ = ln( 2 _x_ + 1 ) for _x_ H 0. 

 (a) Sketch the graph of y = f ( ) x and hence sketch the graph of y = f -^1 ( ) x on the axes below. [3] 

## O 

 y 

 x 

 The function g is defined by g ( ) x = ( x 4 ) 2 + 1 for x G 4. 

 (b) (i) Find an expression for g -^1 ( ) x and state its domain and range. [4] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/21/M/J/20 [Turn over** 

 (ii) Find and simplify an expression for fg ( ). x [2] 

 (iii) Explain why the function gf does not exist. [1] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/21/M/J/20** 

**12 (a)** Find the _x_ -coordinates of the stationary points of the curve _y_ = e 3 _x_^ ( 2 _x_ + 3 ).^6 [6] 

 (b) A curve has equation y = f ( ) x and has exactly two stationary points. Given that f ll( ) x = 4 x 7 , f (. )l 0 5 = 0 and f ( )l 3 = 0 ,use the second derivative test to determine the nature of each of the stationary points of this curve. [2] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/21/M/J/20** 

 (c) In this question all lengths are in centimetres. 

 x 4 x 

 h 

 The diagram shows a solid cuboid with height h and a rectangular base measuring 4 x by x. The volume of the cuboid is 40 cm^3. Given that x and h can vary and that the surface area of the cuboid has a minimum value, find this value. [5] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/21/M/J/20** 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. 

## BLANK PAGE 


