* 5 8 1 4 8 1 2 4 8 5 * 

 DC (NF/CB) 196732/3 R © UCLES 2020 [Turn over 

 This document has 16 pages. Blank pages are indicated. 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/12 

 Paper 1 May/June 2020 

 2 hours 

 You must answer on the question paper. 

 No additional materials are needed. 

 INSTRUCTIONS ● Answer all questions. ● Use a black or dark blue pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. ● Write your name, centre number and candidate number in the boxes at the top of the page. ● Write your answer to each question in the space provided. ● Do not use an erasable pen or correction fluid. ● Do not write on any bar codes. ● You should use a calculator where appropriate. ● You must show all necessary working clearly; no marks will be given for unsupported answers from a calculator. ● Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place for angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. 

 INFORMATION ● The total mark for this paper is 80. ● The number of marks for each question or part question is shown in brackets [ ]. 

# Cambridge IGCSE™ 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/12/M/J/20** 

 Mathematical Formulae 

**1. ALGEBRA** 

 Quadratic Equation 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

_x_ (^) _a b b ac_ 2 !^24 = 

- - 

 Binomial Theorem 

 ( a b ) a … … 

 n a b 

 n a b 

 n r 

 a b b 1 2 

 +^ n^ = n^ + J n^ -^1 + n^ -^2 2 + + n^ r^ r^ + + n L 

 KK 

 J 

 L 

 KK 

 J 

 L 

 KK 

 N 

 P 

 OO 

 N 

 P 

 OO 

 N 

 P 

 OO 

where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( !)!! _n r n_^ _r_^ _r_ = _n_ 

- 

 J 

 L 

 KK 

 N 

 P 

 OO 

 Arithmetic series u a n d 

 S n a l n a n d 

 1 

 2 

 1 2 

(^1 2 1) _n n_ − − = + = ^ + = + ^ h ^ h # h _Geometric series u ar S r a_ (^) _r r S_ (^) _r a_ (^) _r_ 1 1 1 1 1 _n n n n_ 1 1 −^! − − = = 3 = − ^ ^ ^ h h h 

**2. TRIGONOMETRY** 

 Identities sin 2 A + cos^2 A = 1 sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

 Formulae for ∆ ABC 

 sin A sin sin 

 a B 

 b C = = c 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

 ∆ = 21 bc sin A 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/12/M/J/20 [Turn over** 

**1** On the axes below, sketch the graph of _y_ = ( _x_ 2 ) ( _x_ + 1 ) ( _x_ + 2 ) showing the coordinates of the points where the curve meets the axes. [3] 

### O 

 y 

 x 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/12/M/J/20** 

**2** The volume, _V_ , of a sphere of radius _r_ is given by _V_ = 34 r _r_^3. 

 The radius, r cm, of a sphere is increasing at the rate of 0.5 cms-^1. Find, in terms of r, the rate of change of the volume of the sphere when r = 0 25.. [4] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/12/M/J/20 [Turn over** 

**3 (a)** Find the first 3 terms in the expansion of 4 16 _x_ 

 6 

b (^) l (^) in ascending powers of _x_. Give each term in its simplest form. [3] **(b)** Hence find the term independent of _x_ in the expansion of 4 16 _x_^ _x_ (^) _x_^1 6 2 b (^) l b l (^). [3] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/12/M/J/20** 

**4 (a) (i)** Find how many different 5-digit numbers can be formed using the digits 1, 2, 3, 5, 7 and 8, if each digit may be used only once in any number. [1] 

 (ii) How many of the numbers found in part (i) are not divisible by 5? [1] 

 (iii) How many of the numbers found in part (i) are even and greater than 30 000? [4] 

 (b) The number of combinations of n items taken 3 at a time is 6 times the number of combinations of n items taken 2 at a time. Find the value of the constant n. [4] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/12/M/J/20 [Turn over** 

## 5 f : x 7 ( 2 x + 3 )^2 for x 20 

 (a) Find the range of f. [1] 

 (b) Explain why f has an inverse. [1] 

 (c) Find f -^1. [3] 

 (d) State the domain of f -^1. [1] 

## (e) Given that g : x 7 ln( x + 4 ) for x 2 0 ,find the exact solution of fg ( ) x = 49. [3] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/12/M/J/20** 

### 6 

### O 

 y 

 x 

### D (1, 0) 

### C 

### A 

### B 

 2 x + y =5 

 xy + 3 = 0 

 The diagram shows the straight line 2 x + y =5 and part of the curve xy + 3 = 0. The straight line intersects the x -axis at the point A and intersects the curve at the point B. The point C lies on the curve. The point D has coordinates ( ,1 0 ). The line CD is parallel to the y -axis. 

 (a) Find the coordinates of each of the points A and B. [3] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/12/M/J/20 [Turn over** 

 (b) Find the area of the shaded region, giving your answer in the form p + ln q , where p and q are positive integers. [6] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/12/M/J/20** 

**7 (a)** Given that _y_ = ` _x_^^2 1 j 5 _x_ + 2 , show that _x_ 

 y x 

 Ax Bx C d 2 5 2 

 d 2 = + 

+ + (^) , where _A_ , _B_ and _C_ are integers. [5] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/12/M/J/20 [Turn over** 

 (b) Find the coordinates of the stationary point of the curve y =  x^^2 1 j 5 x + 2 , for x 2 0. Give each coordinate correct to 2 significant figures. [3] 

 (c) Determine the nature of this stationary point. [2] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/12/M/J/20** 

### 8 

_O_ (^) _B R_ 

### Q 

### P 

### A 

 The diagram shows a triangle OAB such that OA = a and OB = b. The point P lies on OA such that OP = 43 OA. The point Q is the mid-point of AB. The lines OB and PQ are extended to meet at the point R. Find, in terms of a and b , 

 (a) AB , [1] 

 (b) PQ. Give your answer in its simplest form. [3] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/12/M/J/20 [Turn over** 

 It is given that nPQ = QR and BR = k b , where n and k are positive constants. 

 (c) Find QR in terms of n , a and b. [1] 

 (d) Find QR in terms of k , a and b. [2] 

 (e) Hence find the value of n and of k. [3] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/12/M/J/20** 

**9 (a)** A particle _P_ moves in a straight line such that its displacement, _x_ m, from a fixed point _O_ at time _t_ s is given by _x_ = 10 sin 2 _t_ 5. 

 (i) Find the speed of P when t = r. [1] 

 (ii) Find the value of t for which P is first at rest. [2] 

 (iii) Find the acceleration of P when it is first at rest. [2] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/12/M/J/20 [Turn over** 

 (b) 

### V 

 t s 

 v ms –1 

(^0 5 10 15 20 25) The diagram shows the velocity–time graph for a particle _Q_ travelling in a straight line with velocity _v_ ms-^1 at time _t_ s. The particle accelerates at 3.5 ms-^2 for the first 10 s of its motion and then travels at constant velocity, _V_ ms-^1 , for 10 s. The particle then decelerates at a constant rate and comes to rest. The distance travelled during the interval 20 G _t_ G 25 is 112.5 m. **(i)** Find the value of _V_. [1] **(ii)** Find the velocity of _Q_ when _t_ = 25. [3] **(iii)** Find the value of _t_ when _Q_ comes to rest. [3] **Question 10 is printed on the next page.** 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/12/M/J/20** 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. 

**10 (a)** Solve tan 3 _x_ =1 for r 2 G _x_ Gr 2 radians, giving your answers in terms of r. [4] 

 (b) Use your answers to part (a) to sketch the graph of y = 4 tan 3 x + 4 for r 2 G x G 2 rradians on the axes below. Show the coordinates of the points where the curve meets the axes. 

### O 

 y 

 r x 

– (^2) r – (^4) r 2 r 4 

### [3] 


