# Cambridge IGCSE™ 

* 0 6 9 8 0 9 6 8 5 8 * 

 DC (PQ/CB) 183938/6 © UCLES 2020 [Turn over 

 This document has 12 pages. Blank pages are indicated. 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/22 

 Paper 2 May/June 2020 

 2 hours 

 You must answer on the question paper. 

 No additional materials are needed. 

 INSTRUCTIONS ● Answer all questions. ● Use a black or dark blue pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. ● Write your name, centre number and candidate number in the boxes at the top of the page. ● Write your answer to each question in the space provided. ● Do not use an erasable pen or correction fluid. ● Do not write on any bar codes. ● You should use a calculator where appropriate. ● You must show all necessary working clearly; no marks will be given for unsupported answers from a calculator. ● Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place for angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. 

 INFORMATION ● The total mark for this paper is 80. ● The number of marks for each question or part question is shown in brackets [ ]. 


 ©UCLES 2020 0606/22/M/J/20 

 Mathematical Formulae 

## 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0 , 

_x_ (^) _a b b ac_ 2 

## !^24 

## = 

## 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

 ( a b ) a a b a b a b 

 n n n r 

 b 1 2 

 +^ n^ = n^ + e^ o^ n^ -^1 + e^ o^ n^ -^2 2 + f + eo n^ r^ r^ +f+ n 

where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( !)!! _n r n_^ _r_^ _r_ =^ _n_ 

- 

 e o 

_Arithmetic series u_ (^) _n_ = _a_ + ( _n_ 1 ) _d S_ (^) _n_ = 21 _n a_ ( + _l_ ) = 21 _n_ { 2 _a_ + ( _n_ 1 ) _d_ } _Geometric series u_ (^) _n_ = _arn_^ -^1 ( ) _S_ (^) _r_ ( ) _a r_ 1 _r_ 

## 1 

 n^1 

 n 

= (^) -! 

## 

_S_ (^) 3 = 1 _a_ -^ _r_ ( _r_ 11 ) 

## 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ 

 sin 2 A^ + cos^2 A = 1 sec 2 A^ = 1 +tan^2 A cos ec 2 A = 1 +cot^2 A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC_ 

 sin A sin sin 

 a B 

 b C 

 = = c 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 2 bc cos A 

 T = 21 bc sin A 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/22/M/J/20 [Turn over** 

**1** Variables _x_ and _y_ are such that _y_ = sin _x_ + e _x_^. Use differentiation to find the approximate change in 

 y as x increases from 4 r^ to r 4 + h ,where h is small. [4] 

## 2 DO NOT USE A CALCULATOR IN THIS QUESTION. 

 The point  1 5 , p j lies on the curve y. x 

## 10 2 5 

= (^2) + (^) Find the exact value of _p_ , simplifying your answer. [5] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/22/M/J/20** 

**3** Find the values of _k_ for which the line _y_ = _x_ 3 intersects the curve _y_ = _k x_^2^2 + 5 _kx_ + 1 at two distinct points. [6] 

**4** The three roots of p ( ) _x_ = 0 , where p ( ) _x_ = 2 _x_^3 + _ax_^2 + _bx_ + _c_ are _x_ = 21 , _x_ = _n_ and _x_ =_n_ ,where 

 a , b , c and n are integers. The y -intercept of the graph of y = p( ) x is 4. Find p( ), x simplifying your coefficients. [5] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/22/M/J/20 [Turn over** 

**5 Solutions to this question by accurate drawing will not be accepted.** 

 The points A and B are (4, 3) and (12, −7) respectively. 

 (a) Find the equation of the line L , the perpendicular bisector of the line AB. [4] 

 (b) The line parallel to AB which passes through the point (5, 12) intersects L at the point C. Find the coordinates of C. [4] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/22/M/J/20** 

**6 (a)** Find the equation of the tangent to the curve 2 _y_ = tan 2 _x_ + 7 at the point where _x_ =^ r 8. 

Give your answer in the form _ax_ _y_ = (^) _b_^ r + _c_ ,where _a_ , _b_ and _c_ are integers. [5] **(b)** This tangent intersects the _x_ -axis at _P_ and the _y_ -axis at _Q_. Find the length of _PQ_. [2] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/22/M/J/20 [Turn over** 

**7** Giving your answer in its simplest form, find the exact value of 

**(a)** (^) 5 _x_ 10 2 d , _x_ 0 4 y (^) + [4] **(b)** e d _x_. l n (^4) _x_ 2 2 0 (^2) + 

# y `^ j [5] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/22/M/J/20** 

**8 (a)** Solve 3 cot 2 _x_ 14 cosec _x_ 2 = 0 for 0 ° 1 _x_ 1 360 °. [5] 

**(b)** Show that (^) cot. sin cos _y_ tan^ cos^ sin _y y y_ 2 _y y_ (^4) 4 = [4] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/22/M/J/20 [Turn over** 

**9 (a)** Solve the equation. 27 

(^9 243) _x x_ 2 5 

- = [3] 

 (b) log b log a , 2 

## 1 

 a -^ =^ b where^ a^^2 0 and^ b^^20. 

 Solve this equation for b , giving your answers in terms of a. [5] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/22/M/J/20** 

**10 (a)** The first 5 terms of a sequence are given below. 

 4 2 1 0 5. 0.25 

 (i) Find the 20th term of the sequence. [2] 

 (ii) Explain why the sum to infinity exists for this sequence and find the value of this sum. [2] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/22/M/J/20 [Turn over** 

 (b) The tenth term of an arithmetic progression is 15 times the second term. The sum of the first 6 terms of the progression is 87. 

 (i) Find the common difference of the progression. [4] 

 (ii) For this progression, the n th term is 6990. Find the value of n. [3] 

 Question 11 is printed on the next page. 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/22/M/J/20** 

## 11 

## A 

## B 

## C 1 C 2 

 The circles with centres C 1 and C 2 have equal radii of length r cm. The line C 1 C 2 is a radius of both circles. The two circles intersect at A and B. 

 (a) Given that the perimeter of the shaded region is 4r cm, find the value of r. [4] 

 (b) Find the exact area of the shaded region. [4] 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. 


