# Cambridge IGCSE™ 

* 5 9 6 3 4 1 4 4 6 2 * 

 DC (PQ/CB) 183935/5 © UCLES 2020 [Turn over 

 This document has 16 pages. Blank pages are indicated. 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/23 

 Paper 2 May/June 2020 

 2 hours 

 You must answer on the question paper. 

 No additional materials are needed. 

 INSTRUCTIONS ● Answer all questions. ● Use a black or dark blue pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. ● Write your name, centre number and candidate number in the boxes at the top of the page. ● Write your answer to each question in the space provided. ● Do not use an erasable pen or correction fluid. ● Do not write on any bar codes. ● You should use a calculator where appropriate. ● You must show all necessary working clearly; no marks will be given for unsupported answers from a calculator. ● Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place for angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. 

 INFORMATION ● The total mark for this paper is 80. ● The number of marks for each question or part question is shown in brackets [ ]. 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/23/M/J/20** 

 Mathematical Formulae 

## 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0 , 

 x b^ 2 ba^^4 ac 

## !^2 

## = -^ 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

 ( a b ) a a b a b a b 

 n n n r 

 b 1 2 

 +^ n^ = n^ + e^ o^ n^ -^1 + e^ o^ n^ -^2 2 + f + eo n^ r^ r^ +f+ n 

 where n is a positive integer and ( )!! 

 n! r n r r 

 = n 

- 

 e o 

_Arithmetic series u_ (^) _n_ = _a_ + ( _n_ 1 ) _d S_ (^) _n_ = 21 _n a_ ( + _l_ ) = 21 _n_ { 2 _a_ + ( _n_ 1 ) _d_ } _Geometric series u_ (^) _n_ = _arn_^ -^1 ( ) _S_ (^) _r_ ( ) _a r_ 1 _r_ 

## 1 

 n^1 

 n 

= (^) -! 

## 

_S_ (^) 3 = 1 _a_ -^ _r_ ( _r_ 11 ) 

## 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ 

 sin 2 A + cos^2 A = 1 sec 2 A = 1 +tan^2 A cos ec 2 A^ = 1 +cot^2 A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC_ 

 sin A sin sin 

 a B 

 b C 

 = = c 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 2 bc cos A 

 T = 21 bc sin A 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/23/M/J/20 [Turn over** 

**1 Solutions to this question by accurate drawing will not be accepted.** 

 Find the equation of the perpendicular bisector of the line joining the points (4, 7 ) and ( 8 , 9). [4] 

**2** Find the set of values of _k_ for which 4 _x_^2 4 _kx_ + 2 _k_ + 3 = 0 has no real roots. [5] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/23/M/J/20** 

**3 (a)** On the axes below, sketch the graph of _y_ =( _x_ + 2 ) ( _x_ 1 ) ( _x_ 6 ), showing the coordinates of the points where the graph meets the coordinate axes. 

## O 

 y 

 x 

## [2] 

 (b) Hence solve ( x + 2 ) ( x 1 ) ( x 6 ) G 0. [2] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/23/M/J/20 [Turn over** 

**4 (a) (i)** Find how many different 5-digit numbers can be formed using five of the eight digits 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 if each digit can be used once only. [2] 

 (ii) Find how many of these 5-digit numbers are greater than 60 000. [2] 

 (b) A team of 3 people is to be selected from 4 men and 5 women. Find the number of different teams that could be selected which include at least 2 women. [2] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/23/M/J/20** 

## 5 DO NOT USE A CALCULATOR IN THIS QUESTION. 

 (a) Simplify. 72 

## 128 

## [2] 

 (b) Simplify 1 3 

## 1 

## 3 2 3 

## 3 

## + 

## 

## + 

 , giving your answer as a fraction with an integer denominator. [4] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/23/M/J/20 [Turn over** 

**6 (a)** The curve _y_ = _a_ sin _bx_ + _c_ has a period of 180°, an amplitude of 20 and passes through the point (90°, 3 ). Find the value of each of the constants _a_ , _b_ and _c_. [3] 

 (b) The function g is defined, for 135 ° G x G 135 °,by g ( ) x = 3 tan 2 x 4. Sketch the graph of y = g ( ) x on the axes below, stating the coordinates of the point where the graph crosses the y -axis. [2] 

(^0) 135° _y_ 

- 135 °^ _x_ 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/23/M/J/20** 

**7** Variables _x_ and _y_ are connected by the relationship _y_ = _Ax n_ , where _A_ and _n_ are constants. 

 (a) Transform the relationship y = Ax n to straight line form. [2] 

 When l n y is plotted against l n x a straight line graph passing through the points (0, 0.5) and (3.2, 1.7) is obtained. 

 (b) Find the value of n and of A. [4] 

 (c) Find the value of y when x = 11. [2] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/23/M/J/20 [Turn over** 

**8 (a)** Differentiate _y_ = tan( _x_ + 4 ) 3 sin _x_ with respect to _x_. [2] 

 (b) Variables x and y are such that e 

 n ( ) . 

 l y 

 x 2 

## 2 5 

= (^3) _x_ 

## + 

 Use differentiation to find the approximate change in y as x increases from 1 to 1 + h , where h is small. [6] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/23/M/J/20** 

## 9 DO NOT USE A CALCULATOR IN THIS QUESTION. 

 (a) Find the term independent of x in the binomial expansion of 3 x^1 x^ 

 6 

b (^) l (^). [2] **(b)** In the expansion of 1 2 _x n_ b + l the coefficient of _x_^4 is half the coefficient of _x_^6. Find the value of the positive constant _n_. [6] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/23/M/J/20 [Turn over** 

**10** Solve the equation 

 (a) 5 sec 2 A + 14 tan A 8 = 0 for 0 ° G A G 180 °, [4] 

 (b) 5 sin b 4 B r 8 l + 2 = 0 for r 4 G B Gr 4 radians. [4] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/23/M/J/20** 

**11** In this question all lengths are in centimetres. 

 The volume, V , of a cone of height h and base radius r is given by V = 31 r r^2 h. 

## 180 

 w 

## 90 

## R 

 The diagram shows a large hollow cone from which a smaller cone of height 180 and base radius 90 has been removed. The remainder has been fitted with a circular base of radius 90 to form a container for water. The depth of water in the container is w and the surface of the water is a circle of radius R. 

 (a) Find an expression for R in terms of w and show that the volume V of the water in the container is 

given by _V_ (^) 12 _w_ 180 486000. r 3 = `^ + j^ r [3] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/23/M/J/20 [Turn over** 

 (b) Water is poured into the container at a rate of 10 000 cm^3 s−1. Find the rate at which the depth of the water is increasing when w = 10. [4] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/23/M/J/20** 

**12 (a) (i)** Given that f ( ) _x_ = (^) cos^1 _x_ , show that f ( )l^ _x_ =tan _x_ sec _x_. [3] **(ii)** Hence find (^) y ` 3 tan _x_ sec _x_ -^4 e 3 _x_ jd. _x_ [3] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/23/M/J/20** 

**(b)** Given that (^) _px_ l , _p_ 10 d _x_^ n^2 2 5 y (^) + = find the value of the positive constant^ _p_.^ [5] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/23/M/J/20** 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. 

## BLANK PAGE 


