# Cambridge IGCSE™ 

 DC (JC/CT) 196731/3 R © UCLES 2020 [Turn over 

 This document has 16 pages. Blank pages are indicated. 

* 2 0 3 7 5 4 7 4 3 1 * 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/13 

 Paper 1 May/June 2020 

 2 hours 

 You must answer on the question paper. 

 No additional materials are needed. 

 INSTRUCTIONS ● Answer all questions. ● Use a black or dark blue pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. ● Write your name, centre number and candidate number in the boxes at the top of the page. ● Write your answer to each question in the space provided. ● Do not use an erasable pen or correction fluid. ● Do not write on any bar codes. ● You should use a calculator where appropriate. ● You must show all necessary working clearly; no marks will be given for unsupported answers from a calculator. ● Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place for angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. 

 INFORMATION ● The total mark for this paper is 80. ● The number of marks for each question or part question is shown in brackets [ ]. 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/13/M/J/20** 

 Mathematical Formulae 

**1. ALGEBRA** 

 Quadratic Equation 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

_x_ (^) _a b b ac_ 2 !^24 = 

- - 

 Binomial Theorem 

 ( a b ) a … … 

 n a b 

 n a b 

 n r 

 a b b 1 2 

 +^ n^ = n^ + n^ -^1 + n^ -^2 2 + + n^ r^ r^ + + n 

 J 

 L 

 KK 

 J 

 L 

 KK 

 J 

 L 

 KK 

 N 

 P 

 OO 

 N 

 P 

 OO 

 N 

 P 

 OO 

where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( !)!! _n r n_^ _r_^ _r_ = _n_ 

- 

 J 

 L 

 KK 

 N 

 P 

 OO 

 Arithmetic series u^ a^ n d 

 S n a^ l^ n a n d 

 1 

 2 

 1 2 

 1 2 1 

 n 

 n 

 − 

 − 

 = + 

 = ^ + = + 

 ^ 

 h ^ 

 h 

 # h 

 Geometric series u ar 

_S_ (^) _r a r r S a_^ _r r_ 1 1 1 1 1 _n n n n_ 1 1 −^! − − = = 3 = − ^ ^ ^ h h h 

**2. TRIGONOMETRY** 

 Identities sin 2 A + cos^2 A = 1 sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

 Formulae for ∆ ABC 

 sin A sin sin 

 a B 

 b C 

 = = c 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

 ∆ = 21 bc sin A 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/13/M/J/20 [Turn over** 

**1** f ( ) _x_ = 3 + e _x_ for _x_ !R 

 g ( ) x = 9 x 5 for x !R 

 (a) Find the range of f and of g. [2] 

 (b) Find the exact solution of f -^1 ( ) x =gl^ ( ) x. [3] 

 (c) Find the solution of g 2 ( ) x = 112. [2] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/13/M/J/20** 

**2 (a)** Given that log 2 _x_ + 2 log 4 _y_ = 8 , find the value of _xy_. [3] 

 (b) Using the substitution y = 2 x , or otherwise, solve 2 2 x^^ +^1 2 x^ +^1 2 x + 1 = 0. [4] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/13/M/J/20 [Turn over** 

**3** At time _t_ s, a particle travelling in a straight line has acceleration ( 2 _t_ 1 ) 2 ms 2 

 1 + -^ -^. When t = 0 , the particle is 4 m from a fixed point O and is travelling with velocity 8ms -^1 away from O. 

 (a) Find the velocity of the particle at time t s. [3] 

 (b) Find the displacement of the particle from O at time t s. [4] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/13/M/J/20** 

**4 (a)** Write 2 _x_^2 + 3 _x_ 4 in the form _a x_ ( + _b_ )^2 + _c_ , where _a_ , _b_ and _c_ are constants. [3] 

 (b) Hence write down the coordinates of the stationary point on the curve y = 2 x^2 + 3 x 4. [2] 

 (c) On the axes below, sketch the graph of y = 2 x^2 + 3 x 4 , showing the exact values of the intercepts of the curve with the coordinate axes. [3] 

## O 

 y 

 x 

 (d) Find the value of k for which 2 x^2 + 3 x 4 = k has exactly 3 values of x. [1] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/13/M/J/20 [Turn over** 

**5** p ( ) _x_ = 6 _x_^3 + _ax_^2 + 12 _x_ + _b_ , where _a_ and _b_ are integers. 

 p ( ) x has a remainder of 11 when divided by x 3 and a remainder of 21 when divided by x + 1. 

 (a) Given that p ( ) x = ( x 2 ) Q x ( ), find Q x ( ) , a quadratic factor with numerical coefficients. [6] 

 (b) Hence solve p ( ) x = 0. [2] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/13/M/J/20** 

**6 (a)** Find the unit vector in the direction of 

## 5 

## 12 

 e o. [1] 

 (b) Given that k r 

## 4 

## 1 

## 2 

## 3 

## 10 

## 5 

## + 

## 

## = 

## 

 e o e o e o, find the value of each of the constants k and r. [3] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/13/M/J/20 [Turn over** 

 (c) Relative to an origin O , the points A , B and C have position vectors p , 3 q p and 9 q 5 p respectively. 

 (i) Find AB in terms of p and q. [1] 

 (ii) Find AC in terms of p and q. [1] 

 (iii) Explain why A , B and C all lie in a straight line. [1] 

 (iv) Find the ratio AB : BC. [1] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/13/M/J/20** 

## 7 

## O 

## A 

## C D 

## B 

 i rad 

 12 cm 

 10 cm 

 The diagram shows an isosceles triangle OAB such that OA = OB = 12cmand angle AOB = i radians. Points C and D lie on OA and OB respectively such that CD is an arc of the circle, centre O , radius 10 cm. The area of the sector OCD = 35cm 2. 

 (a) Show that i = 0 7.. [1] 

 (b) Find the perimeter of the shaded region. [4] 

 (c) Find the area of the shaded region. [3] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/13/M/J/20 [Turn over** 

**8 (a)** An arithmetic progression has a first term of 7 and a common difference of 0.4. Find the least number of terms so that the sum of the progression is greater than 300. [4] 

 (b) The sum of the first two terms of a geometric progression is 9 and its sum to infinity is 36. Given that the terms of the progression are positive, find the common ratio. [4] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/13/M/J/20** 

## 9 

 xy = 2 

 x = 3 

 y = 5 x – 3 

 y 

 O B x 

## A 

## C 

## D 

 The diagram shows part of the curve xy = 2 intersecting the straight line y = 5 x 3 at the point A. The straight line meets the x -axis at the point B. The point C lies on the x -axis and the point D lies on the curve such that the line CD has equation x = 3. Find the exact area of the shaded region, giving your answer in the form p + ln q , where p and q are constants. [8] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/13/M/J/20 [Turn over** 

 Additional working space for question 9. 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/13/M/J/20** 

**10 (a)** Given that _y_ = _x x_ + 2 , show that 

 y 

_x_ (^) _x Ax B_ d 2 2 d = + + (^) , where _A_ and _B_ are constants. [5] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/13/M/J/20** 

 (b) Find the exact coordinates of the stationary point of the curve y = x x + 2. [3] 

 (c) Determine the nature of this stationary point. [2] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/13/M/J/20** 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. 

 BLANK PAGE 


