# Cambridge IGCSE™ 

 This document has 16 pages. Blank pages are indicated. 

 DC (LEG/SW) 196733/3 R © UCLES 2020 [Turn over 

* 4 4 4 0 0 2 6 5 8 1 * 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/11 

 Paper 1 May/June 2020 

 2 hours 

 You must answer on the question paper. 

 No additional materials are needed. 

 INSTRUCTIONS ● Answer all questions. ● Use a black or dark blue pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. ● Write your name, centre number and candidate number in the boxes at the top of the page. ● Write your answer to each question in the space provided. ● Do not use an erasable pen or correction fluid. ● Do not write on any bar codes. ● You should use a calculator where appropriate. ● You must show all necessary working clearly; no marks will be given for unsupported answers from a calculator. ● Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place for angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. 

 INFORMATION ● The total mark for this paper is 80. ● The number of marks for each question or part question is shown in brackets [ ]. 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/11/M/J/20** 

 Mathematical Formulae 

**1. ALGEBRA** 

 Quadratic Equation 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

_x_ (^) _a b b ac_ 2 !^24 = 

- - 

 Binomial Theorem 

 ( a b ) a … … 

 n a b 

 n a b 

 n r 

 a b b 1 2 

 +^ n^ = n^ + J n^ -^1 + n^ -^2 2 + + n^ r^ r^ + + n L 

 KK 

 J 

 L 

 KK 

 J 

 L 

 KK 

 N 

 P 

 OO 

 N 

 P 

 OO 

 N 

 P 

 OO 

where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( !)!! _n r n_^ _r_^ _r_ = _n_ 

- 

 J 

 L 

 KK 

 N 

 P 

 OO 

 Arithmetic series u a n d 

 S n a l n a n d 

 1 

 2 

 1 2 

(^1 2 1) _n n_ − − = + = ^ + = + ^ h ^ h # h _Geometric series u ar S r a_ (^) _r r S_ (^) _r a_ (^) _r_ 1 1 1 1 1 _n n n n_ 1 1 −^! − − = = 3 = − ^ ^ ^ h h h 

**2. TRIGONOMETRY** 

 Identities sin 2 A + cos^2 A = 1 sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

 Formulae for ∆ ABC 

 sin A sin sin 

 a B 

 b C = = c 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

 ∆ = 21 bc sin A 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/11/M/J/20 [Turn over** 

**1** The diagram shows the graph of a cubic curve _y_ = f ( ) _x_. 

 y 

 0 5 x 

## 5 

## – 2 – 1 

 y =f ( ) x 

 (a) Find an expression for f ( ) x. [2] 

 (b) Solve f ( ) x G 0. [2] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/11/M/J/20** 

**2 (a)** Write down the period of 2 cos 3 _x_ 1. [1] 

 (b) On the axes below, sketch the graph of y = 2 cos x 3 1 for 360 ° G x G 360 °. [3] 

 y 

- 360° – 180° 180° 360°^ _x_ 

– (^1) 

## 0 

## 1 

– (^2) 

## 2 

– (^3) 

## 3 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/11/M/J/20 [Turn over** 

**3** The radius, _r_ cm, of a circle is increasing at the rate of 5 cms–1. Find, in terms of r, the rate at which the area of the circle is increasing when _r_ = 3. [4] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/11/M/J/20** 

## 4 DO NOT USE A CALCULATOR IN THIS QUESTION. 

 Find the positive solution of the equation  5 + 4 7 j x^2 +  4 2 7 j^ x 1 = 0 , giving your answer in the form a + b 7 , where a and b are fractions in their simplest form. [5] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/11/M/J/20 [Turn over** 

**5** Find the equation of the tangent to the curve 

 ln y x 

 x 2 

## 3 2 1 

## = 

## + 

` (^) j at the point where _x_ = 1. Give your answer in the form _y_ = _mx_ + _c_ , where _m_ and _c_ are constants correct to 3 decimal places. [6] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/11/M/J/20** 

**6** The line _y_ = 5 _x_ + 6 meets the curve _xy_ = 8 at the points _A_ and _B_. 

 (a) Find the coordinates of A and of B. [3] 

 (b) Find the coordinates of the point where the perpendicular bisector of the line AB meets the line y = x. [5] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/11/M/J/20 [Turn over** 

## 7 

 12 cm 

 i rad 

 9.6 cm 

_C_ (^) _D A_ (^) _M B_ 

## O 

 The diagram shows an isosceles triangle OAB such that OA = OB and angle AOB = i radians. The points C and D lie on OA and OB respectively. CD is an arc of length 9.6 cm of the circle, centre O , radius 12 cm. The arc CD touches the line AB at the point M. 

 (a) Find the value of i. [1] 

 (b) Find the total area of the shaded regions. [4] 

 (c) Find the total perimeter of the shaded regions. [3] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/11/M/J/20** 

**8 (a)** Show that (^2) _x_^3 3 + (^2) _x_ 3 + 3 can be written as _x x_ 4 9 

## 12 

(^2) -.^ [2] **(b)** Hence find d _x x_ (^) _x_ 4 9 

## 12 

y (^2) , giving your answer as a single logarithm and an arbitrary constant. [3] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/11/M/J/20 [Turn over** 

 (c) Given that 

 a d ln x 

_x_ (^) _x_ 4 9 (^12 5 5) y (^2  2) = , where _a_ 2 2 , find the exact value of _a_. [4] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/11/M/J/20** 

**9 (a)** An arithmetic progression has a second term of 14 and a sum to 21 terms of 84. Find the first term and the 21st term of this progression. [5] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/11/M/J/20 [Turn over** 

 (b) A geometric progression has a second term of 27 p 2 and a fifth term of p^5. The common ratio, r , is such that 0 1 r 1 1. 

 (i) Find r in terms of p. [2] 

 (ii) Hence find, in terms of p , the sum to infinity of the progression. [3] 

 (iii) Given that the sum to infinity is 81, find the value of p. [2] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/11/M/J/20** 

**10 (a) (i)** Show that (^) sec _i_^1 1 (^) sec 1 _i_^ + 1 = 2 cot^2 _i_. [3] **(ii)** Hence solve (^) sec 21 _x_ 1 (^) sec 21 _x_ + 1 = 6 for 90 ° 1 _x_ 1 90°. [5] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/11/M/J/20 [Turn over** 

 (b) Solve cosec y 3 

 b + rl = 2 for 0 G y G 2 r radians, giving your answers in terms of r. [4] 

 Question 11 is printed on the next page. 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/11/M/J/20** 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. 

**11** A curve is such that d 

 d cos x 

 y 2 5 2 x 

 2 =. This curve has a gradient of 4 

(^3) at the point , 12 4 b r^5 rl. Find the equation of this curve. [8] 


