 This document consists of 12 printed pages. 

 DC (LK/FD) 129464/2 © UCLES 2017 [Turn over 

* 8 7 1 5 8 8 8 0 4 4 * 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/22 Paper 2 May/June 2017 2 hours Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all the questions. Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 


© UCLES 2017 0606/22/M/J/17 

 Mathematical Formulae 

## 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

 x 

 b b ac a 

 = 

 − 2 − 4 2 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( _n_ 

# 1 ) a 

_n_ –1 (^) _b_ + 

# ( 

 n 

# 2 ) a 

_n_ –2 (^) _b_ (^2) + … + 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) a 

_n_ – _r_ (^) _br_ (^) + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( _n_ 

# r ) =^ 

 n! ( n – r )! r! 

## 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ 

 sin^2 A + cos^2 A = 1 

 sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A 

 cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC_ 

 a sin A =^ 

 b sin B =^ 

 c sin C 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

 ∆ = 

## 1 

 2 bc^ sin^ A 


© UCLES 2017 0606/22/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**1** Solve 5 _x_ + 3 = 1 3 _x_. [3] 

**2 Without using a calculator** , express 3 5 

## 1 5 2 

## 

## J + 

## L 

## KK 

## N 

## P 

 OO in the form a + b 5 , where a and b are integers. [5] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/22/M/J/17 

**3 Without using a calculator** , factorise the expression 10 _x_^3 21 _x_ 2 + 4. [5] 

**4** The point _P_ lies on the curve _y_ = 3 _x_^2 7 _x_ + 11. The normal to the curve at _P_ has equation 5 _y_ + _x_ = _k_. Find the coordinates of _P_ and the value of _k_. [6] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/22/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**5 (i)** Show that (^) dd _x_^ [ .0 4 _x_^5 ( .0 2 ln 5 _x_ )] = _kx_^4 ln 5 _x_ , where _k_ is an integer to be found. [2] **(ii)** Express ln 125 _x_ 3 in terms of ln 5 _x_. [1] **(iii)** Hence find (^) y ( _x_^4 ln 125 _x_^3 )d _x_. [2] **6** Show that the roots of _px_^2 + ( _p_ _q x_ ) _q_ = 0 are real for all real values of _p_ and _q_. [4] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/22/M/J/17 

**7 (a)** Given that _a_^7 = _b_ , where _a_ and _b_ are positive constants, find, 

**(i)** log (^) _a b_ , [1] **(ii)** log (^) _b a_. [1] **(b)** Solve the equation log _y_ 4 

## 1 

## 81 =-^.^ [2] 

 (c) Solve the equation 4 

(^32 16) _x x_ 1 2 2 = 

- 

. [3] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/22/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**8 Solutions to this question by accurate drawing will not be accepted.** 

 The points A and B are (−8, 8) and (4, 0) respectively. 

 (i) Find the equation of the line AB. [2] 

 (ii) Calculate the length of AB. [2] 

 The point C is (0, 7) and D is the mid-point of AB. 

 (iii) Show that angle ADC is a right angle. [3] 

 The point E is such that AE 

## 4 

## 7 

## = 

## 

## J 

## L 

## KK 

## N 

## P 

## OO. 

 (iv) Write down the position vector of the point E. [1] 

 (v) Show that ACBE is a parallelogram. [2] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/22/M/J/17 

**9** A function f is defined, for _x_ G 32 , by f ( ) _x_ = 2 _x_^2 6 _x_ + 5. 

 (i) Express f ( ) x in the form a x ( b )^2 + c , where a , b and c are constants. [3] 

 (ii) On the same axes, sketch the graphs of y = f( ) x and y = f-^1 ( ) x , showing the geometrical relationship between them. [3] 

 x 

 y 

## O 

 (iii) Using your answer from (i) , find an expression for part f -^1 ( ) x , stating its domain. [3] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/22/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**10** Solve the equation 

 (i) 4 sin 3 x 4 

## 3 

 r 

- = 

## J 

## L 

## KK 

## N 

## P 

 OO for 0 x 

G G (^2) r (^) radians, [4] **(ii)** 2 tan 2 _y_^ + sec 2 _y_ = 14 sec _y_ + 3 for 0 ° G _y_ G 360 °. [5] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/22/M/J/17 

## 11 

## E 

## A 

## O 

## B 

 D x 

 y 

 y = x^3 + 4 x^2 – 5 x + 5 

_C_ (^) _y_ = 5 The diagram shows part of the curve _y_ = _x_^3 + 4 _x_^2 5 _x_ + 5 and the line _y_ = 5. The curve and the line intersect at the points _A_ , _B_ and _C_. The points _D_ and _E_ are on the _x_ -axis and the lines _AE_ and _CD_ are parallel to the _y_ -axis. **(i)** Find (^) y ( _x_^3 + 4 _x_^2 5 _x_ + 5 ) d _x_. [2] **(ii)** Find the area of each of the rectangles _OEAB_ and _OBCD_. [4] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/22/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

 (iii) Hence calculate the total area of the shaded regions enclosed between the line and the curve. You must show all your working. [4] 

 Question 12 is printed on the next page. 


© UCLES 2017 0606/22/M/J/17 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

**12** The function g is defined, for _x_ 2 21 , by g ( ) _x_ = (^2) _x_ 3 + 1. **(i)** Show that g l( )^ _x_ is always negative. [2] **(ii)** Write down the range of g. [1] The function h is defined, for all real _x_ , by h ( ) _x_ = _kx_ + 3 , where _k_ is a constant. **(iii)** Find an expression for hg ( ) _x_. [1] **(iv)** Given that hg 0( ) = 5 , find the value of _k_. [2] **(v)** State the domain of hg. [1] 


