 This document consists of 12 printed pages. DC (RW/FD) 129466/3© UCLES 2017 [Turn over 

* 9 2 7 2 0 8 0 0 1 6 * **ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/11** Paper 1 **May/June 2017 2 hours** Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator **READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST** Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in.Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs.Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO **NOT** WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. AnswerGive non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of **all** the questions. angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question.The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together.The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 


© UCLES 2017 0606/11/M/J/17 

 Mathematical Formulae 

### 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ For the equation _ax_^2 + _bx_ + _c_ = 0, _x_ = -^^ _b_^^! 2 _ba_^^2 -^4 _ac_ 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( _n_ 1 ) _an_ –1^ _b_ + (^) ( _n_ 2 ) _an_ –2^ _b_^2 + … + (^) ( _nr_ ) _an_ – _r_^ _br_^ + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( _nr_ ) = (^) ( _n_ – _n_! _r_ )! _r_! 

### 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ sin^2 _A_ + cos^2 _A_ = 1 sec^2 _A_ = 1 + tan^2 _A_ cosec^2 _A_ = 1 + cot^2 _A_ 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC a_ sin _A_ =^ 

 b sin B =^ 

 c sin C a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A ∆ = 12 bc sin A 


© UCLES 2017 0606/11/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**1** The line _y_ = _kx_ 5 , where _k_ is a positive constant, is a tangent to the curve _y_ = _x_^2 + 4 _x_ at the point _A_. **(i)** Find the exact value of _k_. [3] 

 (ii) Find the gradient of the normal to the curve at the point A , giving your answer in the form a + b 5 , where a and b are constants. [2] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/11/M/J/17 

**2** It is given that p ^ h _x_ = _x_^3 + _ax_^2 + _bx_ 48. When p^ h _x_ is divided by _x_ 3 the remainder is 6. Given that p l^ h 1 = 0 , find the value of _a_ and of _b_. [5] 

**3 (a)** Simplify _x y_^8^10 ' 3 _x y_^3 -^6 , giving your answer in the form _x ya_^ _b_^ , where _a_ and _b_ are integers. [2] 

 (b) (i) Show that 4 ^ t^ 2 h^21 + 5 ^ t 2 h^23 can be written in the form ^ t^ 2 h^ p ^ qt + r h, where p , q and r are constants to be found. [3] 

 (ii) Hence solve the equation 4 ^ t^ 2 h^21 + 5 ^ t 2 h^23 = 0. [1] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/11/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**4 (a)** It is given that f ^ h _x_ = 3 e -^4 _x_ + 5 for _x_! R. **(i)** State the range of f. [1] 

 (ii) Find f -^1 and state its domain. [4] 

 (b) It is given that g ^ h x = x^2 + 5 and h ^ h x =ln x for x 2 0. Solve hg ^ h x = 2. [3] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/11/M/J/17 

**5 (a)** 

### O 

### A 

### M 

### C 

### B 

 a b 

 c The diagram shows a figure OABC , where OA = a , OB = b and OC = c. The lines AC and OB intersect at the point M where M is the midpoint of the line AC. (i) Find, in terms of a and c , the vector OM. [2] 

 (ii) Given that OM MB : = 2 3: , find b in terms of a and c. [2] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/11/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

 (b) Vectors i and j are unit vectors parallel to the x -axis and y -axis respectively. The vector p has a magnitude of 39 units and has the same direction as 10 i + 24 j. (i) Find p in terms of i and j. [2] 

 (ii) Find the vector q such that 2 p + q is parallel to the positive y -axis and has a magnitude of 12 units. [3] 

 (iii) Hence show that q = k 5 , where k is an integer to be found. [2] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/11/M/J/17 

### 6 

### O 

### A D 

### B C 

 8 cm 

 12 cm 

 The diagram shows a circle, centre O , radius 12 cm. The points A and B lie on the circumference of the circle and form a rectangle with the points C and D. The length of AD is 8 cm and the area of the minor sector AOB is 150 cm^2. (i) Show that angle AOB is 2.08 radians, correct to 2 decimal places. [2] 

 (ii) Find the area of the shaded region ADCB. [6] 

 (iii) Find the perimeter of the shaded region ADCB. [3] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/11/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**7** Show that the curve _y_ = ^ 3 _x_ 2 + 8 h^35 has only one stationary point. Find the coordinates of this stationary point and determine its nature. [8] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/11/M/J/17 

**8 (i)** On the axes below sketch the graphs of _y_ = 2 _x_ 5 and 9 _y_ = 80 _x_ 16 _x_ 2. [5] 

### –1 0 1 

### –10 

### –5 

### 5 

### 10 

 y 

 2 3 4 5 6 x 

 (ii) Solve 2 x 5 = 4. [3] 

 (iii) Hence show that the graphs of y = 2 x 5 and 9 y = 80 x 16 x 2 intersect at the points where y = 4. [1] 

 (iv) Hence find the values of x for which 9 2 x 5 G 80 x 16 x 2. [2] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/11/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**9 (i)** Show that 5 + 4 tan 2 J 3^ _x_^ = 4 sec^23 _x_ + 1 L 

### KK^ J 

### L 

### N KK 

### P 

### OO^ N 

### P 

### OO. [1] 

**(ii)** Given that (^) dd _x_^ tan J^ _x_ 3^ = 31 sec^23 _x_ L 

### KK^ J 

### L 

 c^ N^ KK P 

### OO^ N 

### P 

 m OO, find sec 2 J x 3^ d x L 

### KK^ N 

### P 

## y OO.^ [1] 

 (iii) 

### O 

 y 

 x 

 y = 5 + 4 tan^2 J x 3 L 

 KK N P 

 OO 

### 2 

 The diagram shows part of the curve y = 5 + 4 tan^2 J 3 x L 

### KK^ N 

### P 

 OO. Using the results from parts (i) and (ii) , find the exact area of the shaded region enclosed by the curve, the x -axis and the lines x = r 2 and x = r. [5] 

 Question 10 is printed on the next page. 


© UCLES 2017 0606/11/M/J/17 

**10 (a)** Given that _y_ = (^4) _x_ e (^2 3) + _x_ 1 , find (^) dd _xy_^. [3] **(b)** Variables _x_ , _y_ and _t_ are such that _y_ = 4 cos J _x_ + r 3 + 2 3 sin _x_ +r 3 L 

### KK^ J 

### L 

### N KK 

### P 

### OO^ N 

### P 

 OO and d d y^ t^ = 10. 

**(i)** Find the value of (^) dd _xy_^ when _x_ = r 2. [3] **(ii)** Find the value of d d _x_^ _t_ when _x_ = r 2. [2] Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge InternationalExaminations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge LocalExaminations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 


