 This document consists of 12 printed pages. 

 DC (KN/FD) 129463/3 © UCLES 2017 [Turn over 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

* 6 5 9 5 4 0 4 1 3 2 * 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/21 Paper 2 May/June 2017 2 hours Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all the questions. Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 


© UCLES 2017 0606/21/M/J/17 

 Mathematical Formulae 

## 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

 x 

 b b ac a 

 = 

 − 2 − 4 2 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( _n_ 

# 1 ) a 

_n_ –1 (^) _b_ + 

# ( 

 n 

# 2 ) a 

_n_ –2 (^) _b_ (^2) + … + 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) a 

_n_ – _r_ (^) _br_ (^) + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( _n_ 

# r ) =^ 

 n! ( n – r )! r! 

## 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ 

 sin^2 A + cos^2 A = 1 

 sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A 

 cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC_ 

 a sin A =^ 

 b sin B =^ 

 c sin C 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

 ∆ = 

## 1 

 2 bc^ sin^ A 


© UCLES 2017 0606/21/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**1** Find the equation of the curve which passes through the point (2, 17) and for which (^) _x y_ d^4 _x_^1 d (^3) = +. [4] **2 Do not use a calculator in this question. (a)** Show that 24 27 15 # + 9 30 can be written in the form _a_ 2 , where _a_ is an integer. [3] **(b)** Solve the equation 3 1^^ + _x_ h^ = 2 ^ _x_ 3 h, giving your answer in the form _b_ + _c_ 3 , where _b_ and _c_ are integers. [3] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/21/M/J/17 

**3** The variables _x_ and _y_ are such that _y_ = ln( _x_^2 + 1 ). 

 (i) Find an expression for x 

 y d 

 d 

. [2] 

 (ii) Hence, find the approximate change in y when x increases from 3 to 3 + h , where h is small. [2] 

**4 (a)** Given that _y_ = 7 cos 10 _x_ 3 , where the angle _x_ is measured in degrees, state 

 (i) the period of y , [1] 

 (ii) the amplitude of y. [1] 

 (b) 

## 0 

## 0° 45° 90° 135° 180° 225° 270° 315° 360° 

## 2 

## 4 

## 6 

## 8 

## 10 

## 12 

 y 

 x 

 Find the equation of the curve shown, in the form y = a g( bx ) + c , where g ( ) x is a trigonometric function and a , b and c are integers to be found. [4] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/21/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**5 (i)** Given that _a_ is a constant, expand ( 2 + _ax_ )^4 , in ascending powers of _x_ , simplifying each term of your expansion. [2] 

 Given also that the coefficient of x^2 is equal to the coefficient of x^3 , 

 (ii) show that a = 3 , [1] 

 (iii) use your expansion to show that the value of 1.97^4 is 15.1 to 1 decimal place. [2] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/21/M/J/17 

**6** Four cinemas, _P_ , _Q_ , _R_ and _S_ each sell adult, student and child tickets. The number of tickets sold by each cinema on one weekday were _P_ : 90 adult, 10 student, 30 child _Q_ : 45 student _R_ : 25 adult, 15 child _S_ : 10 adult, 100 child. 

 (i) Given that L = ^ 1 1 1 1 h, construct a matrix, M , of the number of tickets sold, such that the matrix product LM can be found. [1] 

 (ii) Find the matrix product LM. [1] 

 (iii) State what information is represented by the matrix product LM. [1] 

 An adult ticket costs $5, a student ticket costs $4 and a child ticket costs $3. 

 (iv) Construct a matrix, N , of the ticket costs, such that the matrix product LMN can be found and state what information is represented by the matrix product LMN. [2] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/21/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**7 (a)** On each of the Venn diagrams below shade the region which represents the given set. 

## ∩ ∩ ∩ 

##   

## X 

## X 

## P 

## P' 

## Q 

## Q 

## R 

## Y' R 

## Y 

## [2] 

 (b) In a group of students, each student studies at most two of art, music and design. No student studies both music and design. 

 A denotes the set of students who study art, M denotes the set of students who study music, D denotes the set of students who study design. 

 (i) Write the following using set notation. 

 No student studies both music and design. [1] 

 There are 100 students in the group. 39 students study art, 45 study music and 36 study design. 12 students study both art and music. 25 students study both art and design. 

 (ii) Complete the Venn diagram below to represent this information and hence find the number of students in the group who do not study any of these subjects. 

 (^) _A_ 

## [3] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/21/M/J/17 

**8 (a)** A football club has 30 players. In how many different ways can a captain and a vice-captain be selected at random from these players? [1] 

 (b) A team of 11 teachers is to be chosen from 2 mathematics teachers, 5 computing teachers and 9 science teachers. Find the number of different teams that can be chosen if 

 (i) the team must have exactly 1 mathematics teacher, [2] 

 (ii) the team must have exactly 1 mathematics teacher and at least 4 computing teachers. [4] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/21/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**9** The curve 3 _x_^2 + _xy_ _y_^2 + 4 _y_ 3 = 0 and the line _y_ = 2 1( _x_ )intersect at the points _A_ and _B_. 

 (i) Find the coordinates of A and of B. [5] 

 (ii) Find the equation of the perpendicular bisector of the line AB , giving your answer in the form ax + by = c , where a , b and c are integers. [4] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/21/M/J/17 

**10** The table shows values of the variables _t_ and _P_. 

 t 1 1.5 2 2.5 P 4.39 8.33 15.8 30.0 

 (i) Draw the graph of ln P against t on the grid below. [2] 

## 0.5 

## 1 

## 2 

## 3 

 ln P 

(^0 1) 1.5 2 2.5 _t_ **(ii)** Use the graph to estimate the value of _P_ when _t_ = 2 2.. [2] **(iii)** Find the gradient of the graph and state the coordinates of the point where the graph meets the vertical axis. [2] **(iv)** Using your answers to part **(iii)** , show that _P_ = _abt_ , where _a_ and _b_ are constants to be found. [3] **(v)** Given that your equation in part **(iv)** is valid for values of _t_ up to 10, find the smallest value of _t_ , correct to 1 decimal place, for which _P_ is at least 1000. [2] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/21/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**11 (i)** Prove that sin _x_ ( cot _x_ + tan _x_ ) = sec _x_. [4] 

 (ii) Hence solve the equation sin x ( cot x + tan x ) = 2 for 0 c G x G 360 c. [4] 

 Question 12 is printed on the next page. 


© UCLES 2017 0606/21/M/J/17 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

**12** A particle moves in a straight line so that, _t_ seconds after passing a fixed point _O_ , its displacement, _s_ m, from _O_ is given by 

 s = 1 + 3 t cos 5 t. 

 (i) Find the distance between the particle’s first two positions of instantaneous rest. [7] 

 (ii) Find the acceleration when t = π. [2] 


