 This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. 

 DC (KN/CGW) 129468/2 

 © UCLES 2017 [Turn over 

* 8 2 6 2 8 4 1 6 1 7 * 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/13 

 Paper 1 May/June 2017 

 2 hours 

 Candidates answer on the Question Paper. 

 Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. 

 Write in dark blue or black pen. 

 You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. 

 Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. 

 DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all the questions. 

 Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in 

 degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. 

 The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. 

 You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. 

 The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. 

 The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 

 Cambridge International Examinations 

 Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 


© UCLES 2017 0606/13/M/J/17 

 Mathematical Formulae 

### 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 For the equation ax 

 2 

 + bx + c = 0, 

 x 

 a 

 b b ac 

### 2 

### 4 

 2 

### ! 

### = 

### 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

 ( a + b ) 

 n 

 = a 

 n 

 + 

# ( 

 n 

# 1 ) 

 a 

 n –1 

 b + 

# ( 

 n 

# 2 ) 

 a 

 n –2 

 b 

 2 

 + … + 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) 

 a 

 n – r 

 b 

 r 

 + … + b 

 n 

 , 

 where n is a positive integer and 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) 

### = 

 n! 

 ( n – r )! r! 

### 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ 

 sin 

 2 

 A + cos 

 2 

 A = 1 

 sec 

 2 

 A = 1 + tan 

 2 

 A 

 cosec 

 2 

 A = 1 + cot 

 2 

 A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC_ 

 a 

 sin A 

 = 

 b 

 sin B 

 = 

 c 

 sin C 

 a 

 2 

 = b 

 2 

 + c 

 2 

- 2 _bc_ cos _A_ 

### ∆ = 

 1 

 2 

 bc sin A 


© UCLES 2017 0606/13/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**1 (a)** On the Venn diagram below, shade the region which represents ^ _A_ + _B_ lh , ^ _C_ + _B_ lh 

. [1] 

### A B 

### C 

###  

 (b) Complete the Venn diagram below to show the sets Y and Z such that Z 1 X 1 Y. [1] 

### X 

###  

**2** Given that _y_ = 3 + 4 cos 9 _x_ , write down 

 (i) the amplitude of y , [1] 

 (ii) the period of y. [1] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/13/M/J/17 

**3 (i)** On the axes below, sketch the graph of _y_ = 3 sin _x_ 2 for 0 G _i_ G 360 c c 

. [3] 

### 6 

 y 

 x 

### 4 

### 2 

### 0 

### 90° 180° 270° 360° 

### –2 

### –4 

### –6 

 (ii) Given that 0 G 3 sin x 2 G k for 0 c G x G 360 c, write down the value of k. [1] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/13/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**4** In this question, all dimensions are in centimetres. 

### A 

### B C 

### 3 + 2 √5 

### M 

### 4 + 6 √5 

 The diagram shows an isosceles triangle ABC , where AB = AC. The point M is the mid-point of BC. 

 Given that AM = 3 + 2 5 and BC = 4 + 6 5 , find, without using a calculator , 

 (i) the area of triangle ABC , [2] 

 (ii) tan ABC , giving your answer in the form 

 c 

 a + b 5 

 where a , b and c are positive integers. [3] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/13/M/J/17 

**5** The normal to the curve _y_ = 4 _x_ + 9 , at the point where _x_ = 4 , meets the _x-_ and _y_ -axes at the points _A_ 

 and B. Find the coordinates of the mid-point of the line AB. [7] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/13/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**6 (a)** Given that **A** = 

### 3 

### 2 

### 1 

### 4 

### J 

### L 

### K 

### K 

### N 

### P 

### O 

### O, B = 

### 5 

### 2 

### 1 

### 1 

### 4 

### 0 

### J 

### L 

### K 

### K 

### K 

### N 

### P 

### O 

### O 

### O 

 and C = 

### 5 

### 3 

### 2 

### 1 

### 

### J 

### L 

### K 

### K 

### N 

### P 

### O 

 O, find 

 (i) A + 3 C , [2] 

 (ii) BA. [2] 

 (b) (i) Given that X = 

### 1 

### 4 

### 3 

### 2 

### 

### 

### J 

### L 

### K 

### K 

### N 

### P 

### O 

 O, find X 

 –1 

. [2] 

 (ii) Hence find Y , such that XY = 

### 5 

### 15 

### 10 

### 20 

### 

### J 

### L 

### K 

### K 

### N 

### P 

### O 

### O. [3] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/13/M/J/17 

**7 (a)** Show that 

 cos sec 

 tan sin 

 tan sin 

 2 2 

 i i 

 i i 

 i i 

### + 

### + 

### =. [4] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/13/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

 (b) Given that x = 3 sin z and 

 cos 

 y 

### 3 

 z 

 = , find the numerical value of 9 y x y 

 2 2 2 

### -. [3] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/13/M/J/17 

**8** It is given that p ( ) _x_ 2 _x ax_ 4 _x b_ 

 3 2 

 = + + + , where a and b are constants. It is given also that 2 x + 1 is a 

 factor of p ( ) x and that when p ( ) x is divided by x 1 there is a remainder of 12. 

 (i) Find the value of a and of b. [5] 

 (ii) Using your values of a and b , write p ( ) x in the form ( 2 x + 1 q) ( ) x , where q ( ) x is a quadratic 

 expression. [2] 

 (iii) Hence find the exact solutions of the equation p ( ) x = 0. [2] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/13/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**9** It is given that 15e 5 e d _x_ 6 

 x x 

 k 

 k 

 5 5 

### = 

- 

- 

 ^ h 

## y 

### . 

 (i) Show that e e 3 

 5 k 5 k 

### = 

- 

### . [5] 

 (ii) Hence, using the substitution y e 

 5 k 

 = , or otherwise, find the value of k. [3] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/13/M/J/17 

**10** It is given that _y_ = ( 10 _x_ + 2 ) ln( 5 _x_ + 1 ). 

 (i) Find 

 x 

 y 

 d 

 d 

### . [4] 

 (ii) Hence show that ( ) 

### ( ) 

 ln x x ln( ) 

 ax b 

 5 1 x x c 

### 5 

 + d 5 1 

### + 

## y = + + , where a and b are integers and c is a 

 constant of integration. [3] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/13/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

 (iii) Hence find ln ( 5 x 1 ) d x 

 0 

 5 

 1 

### + 

## y 

 , giving your answer in the form 

 d ln f 

### 5 

### + 

 , where d and f are integers. 

### [2] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/13/M/J/17 

**11** A curve has equation _y_ = 6 _x_ _x x_. 

 (i) Find the coordinates of the stationary point of the curve. [4] 

 (ii) Determine the nature of this stationary point. [2] 

 (iii) Find the approximate change in y when x increases from 4 to 4 + h , where h is small. [3] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/13/M/J/17 

**12** A particle moves in a straight line, such that its velocity, _v_ ms 

- 1 

 , t s after passing a fixed point O , is 

 given by v = 2 + 6 t + 3 sin 2 t. 

 (i) Find the acceleration of the particle at time t. [2] 

 (ii) Hence find the smallest value of t for which the acceleration of the particle is zero. [2] 

 (iii) Find the displacement, x m from O , of the particle at time t. [5] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/13/M/J/17 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every 

reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the 

publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International 

Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after 

the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local 

Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

### BLANK PAGE 


