 This document consists of 10 printed pages and 2 blank pages. 

 IB19 11_0455_13/4RP © UCLES 2019 [Turn over 

# *2323848193* 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## ECONOMICS 0455/13 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice October/November 2019 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are thirty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. 


© UCLES 2019 0455/13/O/N/19 

**1** What identifies a finite resource? 

 A The resource does not renew itself. 

 B The supply of the resource is greater than demand. 

 C There is no opportunity cost for the resource. 

 D There is unlimited supply of the resource. 

**2** Country X provides computers to help teachers in the classroom. 

 How would this technology increase the economic potential of country X? 

 A It improves the quality of human resources. 

 B It reduces the amount of land required for education. 

 C It removes the need for teachers. 

 D It requires more teachers to do the same work. 

**3** Sam wrote a list of how he would prefer to spend his Saturday afternoon. 

 first choice go to a cricket match 

 second choice watch the annual town parade 

 third choice go to the cinema 

 fourth choice visit relatives 

 Unfortunately a thunderstorm caused the cricket match and the town parade to be cancelled. Sam went to the cinema. 

 What was the opportunity cost of going to the cinema? 

 A going to a cricket match 

 B watching the annual town parade 

 C visiting relatives 

 D losing his Saturday free time 

**4** Which pair of economic institutions can be found in a market economy? 

 A local government and charities 

 B monopolies and commercial banks 

 C nationalised industries and partnerships 

 D stock exchange and public corporations 


© UCLES 2019 0455/13/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**5** In a private market system certain goods and services would not be available unless the government intervened. 

 What does this identify in a private market? 

 A market distribution 

 B market equilibrium 

 C market failure 

 D market structure 

**6** There has been a movement upwards along the supply curve of a product. 

 What is the most likely explanation for this? 

 A Consumer incomes have fallen. 

 B New technology has made the product cheaper to produce. 

 C The government has imposed a tax on the product. 

 D The price of a substitute has increased. 

**7** Price elasticity of demand (PED) measures the responsiveness of demand to a change in price. It can differ for different goods. 

 For which good is the PED most elastic according to the table? 

 good percentage change in quantity demanded 

 percentage change in price 

 A butter 6.0 5.0 

 B cars 5.5 5.0 

 C furniture 5.0 5.0 

 D petrol 3.0 5.0 

**8** What is **most** likely to increase the occupational mobility of labour? 

 A building more houses 

 B increased spending on re-training schemes 

 C increased total government spending 

 D increasing the information on job availability 


© UCLES 2019 0455/13/O/N/19 

**9** Which organisations can directly fund the growth of firms? 

 central bank 

 commercial banks government 

 A no yes no 

 B no yes yes 

 C yes no no 

 D yes no yes 

**10** The table shows how three people (X, Y and Z) spend their income. 

 person X person Y person Z 

 food, clothing and housing 35% 50% 20% 

 entertainment and leisure 25% 20% 40% 

 luxury goods 40% 30% 40% 

 For these three people, what is the most likely order of income, from highest income to lowest income? 

## A X → Y→ Z 

## B Y → Z → X 

## C Z → X → Y 

## D Z → Y → X 

**11** A musician has a choice of playing for an orchestra in either Germany or England. 

 Which combination of incomes and cost of living is most likely to cause her to choose the German orchestra? 

 Incomes and cost of living in Germany compared with those in England 

 pre-tax (gross) income after-tax (net) income cost of living 

 A higher higher higher 

 B higher lower lower 

 C lower higher higher 

 D lower higher lower 


© UCLES 2019 0455/13/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**12** A public limited company has shares which are 

 A freely transferable on the stock exchange. 

 B owned by the government. 

 C owned only by its workers. 

 D restricted in their transferability. 

**13** In 2015, a large UK company attempted to acquire a rival US medical company to become the world’s leading supplier. Both companies specialised in the manufacture of medicines for treating rare diseases. 

 Which term would describe the acquisition if it had been successful? 

 A backwards vertical integration 

 B conglomerate integration 

 C forwards vertical integration 

 D horizontal integration 

**14** The table shows the sales of cold drinks made by a company in the UK in 2016 and 2017. Demand for cold drinks is influenced by changes in the temperature. In 2016 the sales followed the usual seasonal pattern. 

 month sales 2016 (thousand cans) 

 sales 2017 (thousand cans) 

 April 300 290 

 May 400 350 

 June 550 270 

 July 570 490 

 August 620 590 

 In which month of 2017 was the usual pattern disturbed? 

 A May 

 B June 

 C July 

 D August 


© UCLES 2019 0455/13/O/N/19 

**15** A firm producing bicycles has the following costs at different levels of output. 

 output total fixed costs ($) 

 total variable costs ($) 

 10 300 800 

 20 300 1500 

 30 300 3300 

 What happens to the average total cost over this range of output? 

 A It falls continuously. 

 B It falls then rises. 

 C It rises continuously. 

 D It rises then falls. 

**16** A government decides to increase tax revenues from consumer expenditure. 

 Which tax will it increase? 

 A capital gains tax 

 B death duties 

 C profits tax 

 D value added tax 

**17** A government uses a mixture of fiscal policy measures and supply-side policy measures to stimulate growth in the economy. 

 Which combination of policy measures will achieve this? 

 fiscal policy measures supply-side policy measures 

 A increase government expenditure increase skills training 

 B increase government investment increase indirect taxes 

 C increase direct taxation decrease unemployment benefit 

 D increase interest rates decrease money supply 


© UCLES 2019 0455/13/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**18** The table shows tax paid at different income levels in an economy. 

 income level ($) 

 tax paid ($) 

 5 000 500 

 12 000 2400 

 20 000 5000 

 30 000 6000 

 Which description of the tax system used is correct? 

 A continually progressive 

 B progressive then regressive 

 C proportional 

 D regressive then progressive 

**19** The government uses monetary policy and reduces the interest rate. 

 What might be a consequence of this? 

 A a decrease in the rate of inflation 

 B an increase in the level of investment 

 C an increase in the level of savings 

 D an increase in unemployment 

**20** What is the **most** likely result of a sustained increase in Gross Domestic Product (GDP)? 

 A a decrease in living standards 

 B a decrease in the budget surplus 

 C an increase in tax revenues 

 D an increase in unemployment 

**21** Which indicator would be included in the Human Development Index (HDI) for a country? 

 A adult literacy rate 

 B doctors per 1000 people 

 C unemployment rate 

 D years spent in education 


© UCLES 2019 0455/13/O/N/19 

**22** Which type of unemployment is the result of a permanent fall in the demand for the products of an industry? 

 A cyclical 

 B frictional 

 C seasonal 

 D structural 

**23** The graph shows the rate of inflation in a country between 2000 and 2014. 

 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 inflation rate % 

 year 

## 2000 2010 2014 

 What can be concluded about average prices? 

 A They fell throughout the period. 

 B They peaked in 2000. 

 C They rose each year. 

 D They were lower in 2014 than they were in 2010. 

**24** Which change, as a percentage of GDP, would be **unlikely** to be found in a country as it develops? 

 A an increase in average incomes and a decrease in unemployment 

 B an increase in manufacturing production and an increase in shipping services 

 C an increase in subsistence farming and a decrease in financial services 

 D an increase in tourism and a decrease in the export of agricultural products 


© UCLES 2019 0455/13/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**25** In Botswana, better healthcare has meant that birth rates have been falling faster than death rates. Also the number of children born, on average, to each woman has declined from 6.4 to 3.2. 

 What may be concluded from this information? 

 A Government spending on education will need to increase. 

 B Medical improvements have resulted in falling infant mortality rates. 

 C There will be a decline in income for each person working. 

 D There will, in the long run, be an increase in the working population. 

**26** The table shows the percentage share of GDP held by the richest 20% and poorest 20% of the population in each country. 

 Which country had the greatest extremes of income and poverty? 

 country richest 20% poorest 20% 

 A Ghana 41.7% 8.4% 

 B Nigeria 55.7% 4.4% 

 C Senegal 48.2% 6.4% 

 D South Africa 64.8% 2.9% 

**27** What would cause a favourable change in the Kenyan trade in services (invisible) account? 

 A A Kenyan company wins a contract to transport exports from Uganda. 

 B A Kenyan tea company increases its exports. 

 C A Kenyan trade delegation promoting coffee sales visits India. 

 D A Zambian company increases its exports to Kenya. 

**28** A newspaper headline stated ‘Free trade helps the world’s poorest’. 

 Why might this be correct? 

 A Employment will be focused in hi-tech industries. 

 B Environmental disasters will be avoided. 

 C Free trade reduces competitiveness for domestic firms. 

 D The cost of living is likely to go down with free trade. 


© UCLES 2019 0455/13/O/N/19 

**29** A trade union succeeds in raising the wages in an industry above the current equilibrium wage. 

 How would the demand and supply of labour change? 

 change in quantity of labour demanded 

 change in quantity of labour supplied 

 A fall fall 

 B fall rise 

 C rise fall 

 D rise rise 

**30** What would reduce the volume of international trade in the world economy? 

 A a German bank making a loan to a Nigerian company 

 B a Japanese car manufacturer establishing a factory in the Czech Republic 

 C the Canadian government introducing quotas on Malaysian electronics products 

 D the Swedish government granting aid to Somalia 


© UCLES 2019 0455/13/O/N/19 

## BLANK PAGE 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2019 0455/13/O/N/19 

## BLANK PAGE 


