 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. IB18 11_0620_12/3RP© UCLES 2018 [Turn over 

# *1771435356* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/12 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) October/November 2018 Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet^ 45 minutes Soft clean eraserSoft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil.Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unlessthis has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

There areanswers **A** (^) , **forty B** , **C** questions on this paper. Answerand **D**. **all** questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the **one** you consider correct and record your choice in **soft pencil** on the separate Answer Sheet. **Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully.** Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer.Any rough working should be done in this booklet. A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16.Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2018 0620/12/O/N/18 

**1** A gas is heated. The pressure is kept constant. Which statement describes the behaviour of the particles in the gas? **A** The particles move faster and become closer together. **B** The particles move faster and become further apart. **C** The particles move slower and become closer together. **D** The particles move slower and become further apart. 

**2** In which state does 1 dm^3 of methane contain the most particles? **A** gas at 100 °C **B** gas at room temperature **C** liquid **D** solid 

**3** The chromatogram obtained from four mixtures of dyes, P, Q, R and S, is shown. 

 baseline 

 solvent front 

## P Q R S 

 What is the total number of different dyes identified in the four mixtures? A 3 B 4 C 5 D 8 


© UCLES 2018 0620/12/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**4** The diagrams show four pieces of laboratory equipment. balance pipette stop-clock thermometer 

 Which equipment is essential to find out if dissolving a salt in water is an exothermic process? balance pipette stop-clock thermometer A     B     C     D     

**5** How many neutrons are present in the atom 4521 X? **A** 21 **B** 24 **C** 45 **D** 66 

**6** Strontium nitrate is an ionic compound. Cyclohexane is a covalent compound. Which row describes a property of each compound? strontium nitrate cyclohexane **A** conducts electricity in aqueous solution low boiling point **B** low melting point insoluble in water **C** soluble in water conducts electricity when solid **D** conducts electricity when solid high melting point 


© UCLES 2018 0620/12/O/N/18 

**7** Ionic bonds are formed when elements from Group I and Group VII react together. Which statement about ions or ionic compounds is **not** correct? **A** Electrons from one atom are transferred to another atom to form ions. **B** Group VII atoms gain electrons to form ions. **C** Negative ions are formed when atoms lose electrons. **D** Molten ionic compounds conduct electricity. 

**8** What is the relative formula mass of Mg(OH) 2? **A** 21 **B** 30 **C** 42 **D** 58 

**9** Calcium carbonate, CaCO 3 , reacts with dilute hydrochloric acid to produce carbon dioxide. The equation for the reaction is shown. The relative formula mass of calcium carbonate is 100. 

CaCO 3 + 2HC _l_ → CaC _l_ (^) 2 + H 2 O + CO 2 10 g of calcium carbonate is reacted with an excess of dilute hydrochloric acid. Which mass of carbon dioxide is produced? **A** 2.2 g **B** 2.8 g **C** 4.4 g **D** 44 g **10** Concentrated hydrochloric acid and dilute sulfuric acid were electrolysed in separate experimentsusing carbon electrodes. Which statement is correct for both electrolysis experiments? **A** Chlorine gas is produced at the positive electrode. **B** Hydrogen gas is produced at the positive electrode. **C** Hydrogen gas is produced at the negative electrode. **D** Oxygen gas is produced at the negative electrode. 


© UCLES 2018 0620/12/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

# 11 Aqueous nickel(II) sulfate is used as the electrolyte to electroplate a piece of steel with nickel. 

 Which materials are used as the negative electrode and positive electrode? negative electrode 

 positive electrode A carbon steel B nickel steel C platinum nickel D steel nickel 

**12** Which substance does **not** use oxygen to produce heat energy? **A** coal **B** hydrogen **C** natural gas **D** uranium 

**13** Equal volumes and concentrations of dilute hydrochloric acid and aqueous sodium hydroxide aremixed. The temperatures of the solutions are shown. 

solution (^) temperature / °C dilute hydrochloric acid 26 aqueous sodium hydroxide 26 mixture of dilute hydrochloric acid and aqueous sodium hydroxide 

## 33 

 Which statement describes the reaction? A Energy is released and the products have less energy than the reactants. B Energy is released and the products have more energy than the reactants. C Energy is absorbed and the products have less energy than the reactants. D Energy is absorbed and the products have more energy than the reactants. 


© UCLES 2018 0620/12/O/N/18 

# 14 A student heats hydrated copper(II) sulfate. The blue crystals change to a white powder. 

 How can the student reverse this reaction? 

# A Add anhydrous copper(II) sulfate to the white powder. 

 B Add water to the white powder. C Cool the white powder. D Reheat the white powder. 

# 15 Which compound is written with the oxidation state (VII)? 

 A CuSO 4 B FeSO 4 C Fe 2 (SO 4 ) 3 D KMnO 4 

**16** Magnesium powder reacts with an excess of dilute hydrochloric acid to produce hydrogen gas. Which statements about this reaction are correct? 1 The smaller the particles of magnesium powder, the slower hydrogen is produced. 2 The higher the temperature, the faster the magnesium powder disappears. 3 The lower the concentration of dilute hydrochloric acid, the faster the rate of reaction. 4 The faster the magnesium powder disappears, the faster the rate of reaction. **A** 1 and 2 **B** 2 and 3 **C** 2 and 4 **D** 3 and 4 

**17** In which row are the oxides correctly identified? 

 acidic basic A magnesium oxide, calcium oxide sulfur dioxide, carbon dioxide B magnesium oxide, sulfur dioxide carbon dioxide, calcium oxide C sulfur dioxide, carbon dioxide calcium oxide, magnesium oxide D sulfur dioxide, magnesium oxide calcium oxide, carbon dioxide 


© UCLES 2018 0620/12/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**18** The following steps are done to prepare solid magnesium sulfate. 1 filtration 2 measurement of 20 cm^3 of dilute sulfuric acid using a measuring cylinder 3 evaporation 4 addition of an excess of solid magnesium carbonate to dilute sulfuric acid What is the correct order for these steps? **A** 2 → 4 → 3 → 1 **B** 2 → 4 → 1 → 3 **C** 4 → 2 → 1 → 3 **D** 4 → 2 → 3 → 1 

**19** When dilute sulfuric acid is added to solid X, a colourless solution is formed and a gas is produced. What is X? 

# A copper(II) oxide 

 B sodium oxide 

# C copper(II) carbonate 

 D sodium carbonate 

**20** A few drops of methyl orange are added to a reaction mixture. During the reaction, a gas is produced and the methyl orange turns from red to orange. What are the reactants? **A** aqueous sodium hydroxide and ammonium chloride **B** aqueous sodium hydroxide and calcium carbonate **C** dilute hydrochloric acid and magnesium **D** dilute hydrochloric acid and aqueous sodium hydroxide 


© UCLES 2018 0620/12/O/N/18 

**21** The positions of two elements, P and Q, in the Periodic Table are shown. 

## P 

## Q 

 P and Q react together to form a compound. What is the formula of the compound? A QP B Q 2 P C Q 7 P D QP 7 

**22** Elements in Group I of the Periodic Table react with water. Which row describes the products made in the reaction and the trend in reactivity of theelements? 

 products trend in reactivity A metal hydroxide and hydrogen less reactive down the group B metal hydroxide and hydrogen more reactive down the group C metal oxide and hydrogen less reactive down the group D metal oxide and hydrogen more reactive down the group 

**23** The equation shows the reaction between a halogen and aqueous bromide ions. 

X 2 + 2Br –^ → 2X–^ + Br (^2) ......1...... ......2...... ......3...... Which words complete gaps 1, 2 and 3? 1 2 3 **A** chlorine brown colourless **B** chlorine colourless brown **C** iodine brown colourless **D** iodine colourless brown 


© UCLES 2018 0620/12/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**24** An inert gas R is used to fill weather balloons. Which descriptions of R are correct? number of outer shell electrons in atoms of R structure of gas R **A** 2 diatomic molecules **B** 2 single atoms **C** 8 diatomic molecules **D** 8 single atoms 

**25** Four metals, W, X, Y and Z, are separately reacted with water and dilute hydrochloric acid. The results are shown. metal W X Y Z reaction with water fizzes no reaction fizzes vigorously 

 no reaction 

 reaction with dilute hydrochloric acid 

 fizzes no reaction fizzes violently 

 fizzes 

 What is the order of reactivity of the four metals starting with the least reactive? least reactive most reactive A X W Z Y B X Z W Y C Y W Z X D Y Z W X 


© UCLES 2018 0620/12/O/N/18 

**26** Part of the reactivity series is shown. 

 potassium most reactive carbon zinc iron copper least reactive Which metal must be extracted from its ore by electrolysis? A copper B iron C potassium D zinc 

**27** Which statement about the uses of metals is **not** correct? **A** Aluminium is used in aircraft because of its strength and good electrical conductivity. **B** Copper is used in electrical wiring because of its good electrical conductivity. **C** Stainless steel resists corrosion and is used to make cutlery. **D** Transition elements are often used as catalysts. 

**28** Argon is a noble gas used to fill light bulbs. What is the approximate percentage of argon in air? **A** 1% **B** 20% **C** 79% **D** 99% 


© UCLES 2018 0620/12/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**29** The diagrams show experiments involving the rusting of iron. 

 water boiled to remove the air 

 water anhydrous calcium chloride to dry the air 

 iron nails oil 

 tube P tube Q tube R 

 A student predicted the following results. 1 In tube P, the iron nails rust. 2 In tube Q, the iron nails do not rust. 3 In tube R, the iron nails do not rust. Which predictions are correct? A 1, 2 and 3 B 1 and 2 only C 1 and 3 only D 2 and 3 only 

**30** Which statements about sulfur dioxide pollution are correct? 1 It increases the pH of rivers. 2 It damages limestone buildings. 3 It causes respiratory problems. **A** 1 only **B** 2 only **C** 1 and 3 **D** 2 and 3 


© UCLES 2018 0620/12/O/N/18 

**31** The table describes three types of water. 

 watertype source ofwater appearance beforetreatment treatment appearance aftertreatment P river muddy none muddy Q river muddy filtration and chlorination clear R well clear chlorination only clear Which statement is correct? A Only Q and R are suitable for drinking, while P could be used for irrigation. B Only Q and R are suitable for drinking, while P is unsuitable for any purpose. C Only Q is suitable for drinking. R could be used for washing cars and P for irrigation. D P, Q and R are suitable for irrigation and washing cars, but are not suitable for drinking. 

**32** Which compound would **not** be used as an important part of a garden fertiliser? **A** Ca 3 (PO 4 ) 2 **B** KNO 3 **C** Mg(OH) 2 **D** (NH 4 ) 2 SO 4 

**33** Carbon dioxide and methane both contribute to climate change. Which process produces both gases? **A** complete combustion of natural gas **B** farming cattle **C** heating calcium carbonate **D** respiration 

**34** What is **not** a use of lime? **A** It is used as a bleach in the manufacture of wood pulp. **B** It is used to desulfurise flue gases. **C** It is used to neutralise acidic industrial waste. **D** It is used to treat acidic soil. 


© UCLES 2018 0620/12/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**35** Petroleum is a mixture of different hydrocarbons. Which process is used to separate the petroleum into groups of similar hydrocarbons? **A** combustion **B** cracking **C** fractional distillation **D** reduction 

**36** Which two compounds are molecules which both contain a double bond? **A** ethane and ethanoic acid **B** ethane and ethanol **C** ethene and ethanoic acid **D** ethene and ethanol 

**37** Which molecule does **not** belong to the alcohol homologous series? 

## H C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## A 

## H 

## O H H C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H O 

## B 

## H 

## C O H 

## H C H 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## O 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## H C 

## H 

## H H 

## C 

## H H 

## D 

## H 

## O C H 


© UCLES 2018 0620/12/O/N/18 

**38** Ethanol can be formed by: 1 fermentation 2 reaction between steam and ethene. Which of these processes use a catalyst? 1 2 **A**   **B**   **C**   **D**   

**39** Ethanoic acid is a weak acid. Which statements about ethanoic acid are correct? 1 It turns Universal Indicator purple. 2 It reacts with magnesium to form hydrogen gas. 3 It reacts with calcium carbonate to form carbon dioxide gas. 4 It decolourises aqueous bromine. **A** 1, 2 and 3 **B** 1 and 2 only **C** 2, 3 and 4 **D** 2 and 3 only 

**40** Which substance is a natural polymer? **A** ethene **B** glucose **C** nylon **D** protein 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeInternational Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge LocalExaminations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2018 0620/12/O/N/18 


© UCLES 2018 0620/12/O/N/18 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements^1 Hhydrogen^1 

(^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Beberyllium 9 **Key** atomic numberatomic symbol name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mgmagnesium 24 19 Kpotassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Srstrontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Gegermanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 (^22) Tititanium (^4840) Zrzirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rfrutherfordium– 23 Vvanadium (^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Crchromium (^5242) Momolybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sgseaborgium– (^25) Mnmanganese (^5543) Tctechnetium– (^75) Rerhenium (^186107) Bhbohrium– (^26) Feiron (^5644) Ruruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Iriridium (^192109) Mtmeitnerium– (^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pdpalladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Dsdarmstadtium– (^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rgroentgenium– (^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cdcadmium (^11280) Hgmercury (^201112) Cncopernicium– 114 F _l_ flerovium– (^116) Lvlivermorium– (^7) Nnitrogen 1415 Pphosphorus (^3133) Asarsenic (^7551) Sbantimony 12283 Bibismuth 209 (^8) Ooxygen 1616 Ssulfur (^3234) Seselenium (^7952) Tetellurium (^12884) Popolonium– (^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Brbromine 8053 I iodine 12785 Atastatine– (^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Scscandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) Lalanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). actinium– (^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium^141 (^91) Paprotactinium 231 (^60) Ndneodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pmpromethium– (^93) Npneptunium– (^62) Smsamarium (^15094) Puplutonium– (^63) Eueuropium (^15295) Amamericium– (^64) Gdgadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bkberkelium– (^66) Dydysprosium 16398 Cfcalifornium– (^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Eseinsteinium– (^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Mdmendelevium– (^70) Ybytterbium (^173102) Nonobelium– (^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lrlawrencium– 


