* 1 2 3 9 0 4 9 8 8 9 * 

 This document consists of 16 printed pages. 

 DC (KN/SW) 145846/4 © UCLES 2018 [Turn over 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/12 Paper 1 May/June 2018 2 hours Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all the questions. Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 


© UCLES 2018 0606/12/M/J/18 

 Mathematical Formulae 

## 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

 x 

 b b ac a 

 = 

 − 2 − 4 2 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( _n_ 

# 1 ) a 

_n_ –1 (^) _b_ + 

# ( 

 n 

# 2 ) a 

_n_ –2 (^) _b_ (^2) + … + 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) a 

_n_ – _r_ (^) _br_ (^) + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( _n_ 

# r )^ =^ 

 n! ( n – r )! r! 

## 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ 

 sin^2 A + cos^2 A = 1 

 sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A 

 cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC_ 

 a sin A =^ 

 b sin B =^ 

 c sin C 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

 ∆ = 

## 1 

 2 bc^ sin^ A 


© UCLES 2018 0606/12/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**1** It is given that _y_ = 1 + tan 3 _x_. 

 (i) State the period of y. [1] 

 (ii) On the axes below, sketch the graph of y = 1 + tan 3 x for 0 ° G x °G 180 °. [3] 

(^0 30 60 90 120 150 180) _y x_ 


© UCLES 2018 0606/12/M/J/18 

**2** Find the values of _k_ for which the line _y_ = 1 2 _kx_ does not meet the curve _y_ = 9 _x_^2 ( 3 _k_ + 1 ) _x_ + 5. [5] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/12/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**3** The variables _x_ and _y_ are such that when e _y_^ is plotted against _x_^2 , a straight line graph passing through the points (5, 3) and (3, 1) is obtained. Find _y_ in terms of _x_. [5] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/12/M/J/18 

**4** A particle _P_ moves so that its displacement, _x_ metres from a fixed point _O_ , at time _t_ seconds, is given by _x_ = ln ( 5 _t_ + 3 ). 

 (i) Find the value of t when the displacement of P is 3m. [2] 

 (ii) Find the velocity of P when t = 0. [2] 

 (iii) Explain why, after passing through O , the velocity of P is never negative. [1] 

 (iv) Find the acceleration of P when t = 0. [2] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/12/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**5 (i)** The first three terms in the expansion of _x_ 

## 3 

## 9 

## 1 5 

## 

## J 

## L 

## KK 

## N 

## P 

 OO can be written as a x 

 b x 

 c + + 2. Find the value of each of the constants a , b and c. [3] 

 (ii) Use your values of a , b and c to find the term independent of x in the expansion of 

 ( ) x 

 3 x 9 

## 1 

## 2 9 

 5 J + 2 

 L 

## KK 

## N 

## P 

## OO. [3] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/12/M/J/18 

**6** Find the coordinates of the stationary point of the curve _y x_ 

 x 2 1 

## = 2 

## 

+ (^). [6] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/12/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**7** A population, _B_ , of a particular bacterium, _t_ hours after measurements began, is given by _B_ 1000e 

 t = 4. 

 (i) Find the value of B when t = 0. [1] 

 (ii) Find the time taken for B to double in size. [3] 

 (iii) Find the value of B when t = 8. [1] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/12/M/J/18 

**8 (a)** Solve 3 cos 2 _i_ + 4 sin _i_ = 4 for 0 ° G _i_ G 180 °. [4] 

 (b) Solve sin 2 z = 3 cos 2 z for 2 2 

- r^ G _z_ Grradians. [4] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/12/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**9 (a) (i)** Solve lg _x_ = 3. [1] 

 (ii) Write lg a 2 lg b + 3 as a single logarithm. [3] 

**(b) (i)** Solve _x_ 5 + (^) _x_^6 = 0. [2] **(ii)** Hence, showing all your working, find the values of _a_ such that log 4 _a_ 5 + 6 log _a_ 4 = 0. [3] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/12/M/J/18 

**10 Do not use a calculator in this question.** 

 All lengths in this question are in centimetres. 

 60° B 

 A 

 C 

 4 3 5 

 4 3 + 5 

 The diagram shows the triangle ABC , where AB = 4 3 5 , BC = 4 3 + 5 and angle ABC = 60 °. 

 It is known that sin 60° 2 

 = 3 , cos 60° 2 

 = 1 , tan 60° = 3. 

 (i) Find the exact value of AC. [4] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/12/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**(ii)** Hence show that cosec _A CB_ (^) _q_ ( ) _p_ 4 3 5 

## 2 

 = + , where p and q are integers. [4] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/12/M/J/18 

## 11 

 O 

 y 

 B x 

 A 

 y^ e 8 = 4 x +^3 

 The diagram shows the graph of the curve y e^83 

 4 x = +^. The curve meets the y -axis at the point A. 

 The normal to the curve at A meets the x -axis at the point B. Find the area of the shaded region enclosed by the curve, the line AB and the line through B parallel to the y -axis. Give your answer in 

the form (^) _a_^ e^ , where _a_ is a constant. You must show all your working. [10] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/12/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

 Question 12 is printed on the next page. 


© UCLES 2018 0606/12/M/J/18 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

**12 Do not use a calculator in this question.** 

 (a) Given that 

## 6 8 3 

## 9 

 p p q q 

 2 2 3 

 # + # 

- is equal to^2 3 

(^7) # 4 , find the value of each of the constants _p_ and _q_. [3] **(b)** Using the substitution _u x_^3 1 = , or otherwise, solve 4 _x_^^ _x_^3 0 1 3 2 (^3) + + = (^). [4] 


