* 5 0 0 6 7 4 1 9 5 0 * 

 This document consists of 16 printed pages. 

 DC (NF/SG) 162658 © UCLES 2018 [Turn over 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/13 Paper 1 May/June 2018 2 hours Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all the questions. Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 


© UCLES 2018 0606/13/M/J/18 

 Mathematical Formulae 

## 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

 x a 

 b b ac 2 

## = -^!^2 -^4 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( _n_ 

# 1 ) a 

_n_ –1 (^) _b_ + 

# ( 

 n 

# 2 ) a 

_n_ –2 (^) _b_ (^2) + … + 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) a 

_n_ – _r_ (^) _br_ (^) + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( _n_ 

# r ) =^ 

 n! ( n – r )! r! 

## 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ 

 sin^2 A + cos^2 A = 1 

 sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A 

 cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC_ 

 a sin A =^ 

 b sin B =^ 

 c sin C 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

 ∆ = 

 1 2 bc^ sin^ A 


© UCLES 2018 0606/13/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**1** Solve the equations _y_ _x_ = 4 , 

 x^2 + y^2 8 x 4 y 16 = 0. [5] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/13/M/J/18 

**2** Find the equation of the perpendicular bisector of the line joining the points (1, 3) and (4, 5 ). Give your answer in the form _ax_ + _by_ + _c_ = 0, where _a_ , _b_ and _c_ are integers. [5] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/13/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**3** Diagrams **A** to **D** show four different graphs. In each case the whole graph is shown and the scales on the two axes are the same. 

 y 

 x 

## A 

## O 

 y 

 x 

## B 

## O 

 y 

 x 

## C 

## O 

 y 

 x 

## D 

## O 

 Place ticks in the boxes in the table to indicate which descriptions, if any, apply to each graph. There may be more than one tick in any row or column of the table. [4] 

 A B C D 

 Not a function 

 One-one function 

 A function that is its own inverse 

 A function with no inverse 


© UCLES 2018 0606/13/M/J/18 

**4 (i)** The curve _y_ = _a_ + _b_ sin _cx_ has an amplitude of 4 and a period of r 3. Given that the curve passes 

 through the point 

 r , 12 

## 2 

## J 

## L 

## KK 

## N 

## P 

 OO, find the value of each of the constants a , b and c. [4] 

 (ii) Using your values of a , b and c , sketch the graph of y = a + b sin cx for 0 G x G rradians. [3] 

 y 

 0 x 

## 6 

## –6 

 r 


© UCLES 2018 0606/13/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**5** The population, _P_ , of a certain bacterium _t_ days after the start of an experiment is modelled by _P_ = 800e _kt_ , where _k_ is a constant. 

 (i) State what the figure 800 represents in this experiment. [1] 

 (ii) Given that the population is 20 000 two days after the start of the experiment, calculate the value of k. [3] 

 (iii) Calculate the population three days after the start of the experiment. [2] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/13/M/J/18 

**6 (a)** Write (^) ^log 2 _p_ (^) h^ log (^3 2) h +log 3 _q_ as a single logarithm to base 3. [3] **(b)** Given that (^) ^log (^) _a_ (^5) h^2 4 log _a_ 5 + 3 = 0 , find the possible values of _a_. [3] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/13/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**7 (i)** Find the inverse of the matrix 

## 4 

## 5 

## 2 

## 3 

## J 

## L 

## KK 

## N 

## P 

## OO. [2] 

 (ii) Hence solve the simultaneous equations 8 x 4 y 5 = 0, 

- 10 _x_ + 6 _y_ - 7 = 0.     [4] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/13/M/J/18 

**8 (a)** Given that **p** = 2 **i** 5 **j** and **q** = **i** 3 **j** , find the unit vector in the direction of 3 **p** 4 **q**. [4] 

 (b) B 

## A 

 1.25 kmh–1 

 A river flows between parallel banks at a speed of 1.25 kmh-^1. A boy standing at point A on one bank sends a toy boat across the river to his father standing directly opposite at point B. The toy boat, which can travel at v kmh-^1 in still water, crosses the river with resultant speed 2.73 kmh-^1 along the line AB. 

 (i) Calculate the value of v. [2] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/13/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

 The direction in which the boy points the boat makes an angle i with the line AB. 

 (ii) Find the value of i. [2] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/13/M/J/18 

**9 (i)** Find the first 3 terms in the expansion of _x x_ 

## 2 

## 16 

## 1 

 8 

- 

## J 

## L 

## KK 

## N 

## P 

 OO in descending powers of x. [3] 

 (ii) Hence find the coefficient of x^4 in the expansion of x 

_x_ (^) _x_ 

## 2 

## 16 

## 1 1 

## 1 

 8 2 

 2 

- + 

## J 

## L 

## KK 

## J 

## L 

## KK 

## N 

## P 

## OO 

## N 

## P 

## OO. [3] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/13/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**10 Do not use a calculator in this question.** 

 (a) Simplify 6 5 

## 5 6 5 

## + 

## + 

## . [3] 

 (b) Show that 3 0 5.^ # ^^2 h^7 can be written in the form a b , where a and b are integers and a > b. [2] 

**(c)** Solve the equation _x_ + 2 = (^) _x_^4 , giving your answers in simplest surd form. [4] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/13/M/J/18 

## 11 

 y 

 x 

## A 

## O 

 y x x 

## = 16 +^272 

 The diagram shows part of the graph of y x x 

 = 16 + 272 , which has a minimum at A. 

 (i) Find the coordinates of A. [4] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/13/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

 The points P and Q lie on the curve y x x 

 = 16 + 272 and have x -coordinates 1 and 3 respectively. 

 (ii) Find the area enclosed by the curve and the line PQ. You must show all your working. [6] 

 Question 12 is printed on the next page. 


© UCLES 2018 0606/13/M/J/18 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

**12** A curve is such that _x_ 

 y 2 x 5 d 

 d 2 

 2 2 

 1 = 

- ^ h. Given that the curve has a gradient of 6 at the point , 2 

## 9 

## 3 

## J 2 

## L 

## KK 

## N 

## P 

## OO, 

 find the equation of the curve. [8] 


