* 5 2 9 1 7 0 1 6 6 9 * 

 This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. 

 DC (JM) 162865 © UCLES 2018 [Turn over 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/23 Paper 2 May/June 2018 2 hours Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all the questions. Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 


© UCLES 2018 0606/23/M/J/18 

 Mathematical Formulae 

## 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

 x 

 b b ac a 

 = 

 − 2 − 4 2 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( _n_ 

# 1 ) a 

_n_ –1 (^) _b_ + 

# ( 

 n 

# 2 ) a 

_n_ –2 (^) _b_ (^2) + … + 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) a 

_n_ – _r_ (^) _br_ (^) + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( _n_ 

# r ) =^ 

 n! ( n – r )! r! 

## 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ 

 sin^2 A + cos^2 A = 1 

 sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A 

 cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC_ 

 a sin A =^ 

 b sin B =^ 

 c sin C 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

 ∆ = 

## 1 

 2 bc^ sin^ A 


© UCLES 2018 0606/23/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**1** _A_ , _B_ and _C_ are subsets of the same universal set. 

 (i) Write each of the following statements in words. 

 (a) A 1 Y B [1] 

 (b) A + C = Q [1] 

 (ii) Write each of the following statements in set notation. 

 (a) There are 3 elements in set A or B or both. [1] 

 (b) x is an element of A but it is not an element of C. [1] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/23/M/J/18 

**2** The variables _x_ and _y_ are such that _y_ = ln^ 3 _x_ 1 h^ for _x_ 2 31. 

**(i)** Find (^) _x y_ d d 

. [2] 

 (ii) Hence find the approximate change in x when y increases from ln 1 2^^ .h^ to ln 1 2^^. h^ +0 125.. [3] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/23/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**3** A 7-character password is to be selected from the 12 characters shown in the table. Each character may be used only once. 

 Characters 

 Upper-case letters A B C D 

 Lower-case letters e f g h 

 Digits 1 2 3 4 

 Find the number of different passwords 

 (i) if there are no restrictions, [1] 

 (ii) that start with a digit, [1] 

 (iii) that contain 4 upper-case letters and 3 lower-case letters such that all the upper-case letters are together and all the lower-case letters are together. [3] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/23/M/J/18 

**4 Do not use a calculator in this question.** 

 It is given that x + 4 is a factor of p ^ h x^ = 2 x^3 + 3 x^2 + ax 12. When p^ h x^ is divided by x 1 the remainder is b. 

 (i) Show that a =23 and find the value of the constant b. [2] 

 (ii) Factorise p^ h x^ completely and hence state all the solutions of p ^ h x^ = 0. [4] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/23/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**5** The function f is defined by f ^ h _x_^ = (^2) _x_ 1 5 for _x_ 2 2 5.. **(i)** Find an expression for f -^1 ^ h _x_. [2] **(ii)** State the domain of f -^1 ^ h _x_. [1] **(iii)** Find an expression for f 2 ^ h _x_ , giving your answer in the form (^) _cxax_ ++^ _db_ , where _a_ , _b_ , _c_ and _d_ are integers to be found. [3] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/23/M/J/18 

## 6 

 x rad O C 

 D 

 A 

 B 16 cm 

 40 cm 

 In the diagram AOB and DOC are sectors of a circle centre O. The angle AOB is x radians. The length of the arc AB is 40 cm and the radius OB is 16 cm. 

 (i) Find the value of x. [2] 

 (ii) Find the area of sector AOB. [2] 

 (iii) Given that the area of the shaded region ABCD is 140 cm^2 , find the length of OC. [3] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/23/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**7** Differentiate with respect to _x_ 

 (i) 4 x tan x , [2] 

 (ii) x 1 

 e x 2 

 3 1 

- 

 + 

. [3] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/23/M/J/18 

**8** An experiment was carried out recording values of _y_ for certain values of _x_. The variables _x_ and _y_ are thought to be connected by the relationship _y_ = _axn_ , where _a_ and _n_ are constants. 

 (i) Transform the relationship y = axn into straight line form. [2] 

 The values of ln y and ln x were plotted and a line of best fit drawn. This is shown in the diagram below. 

 0 

 0 

 1 

 2 

 3 

 4 

 5 

 2 4 6 8 ln^ x 

 ln y 

 (ii) Use the graph to find the value of a and of n , stating the coordinates of the points that you use. [3] 

 (iii) Find the value of x when y = 50. [2] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/23/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**9 (i)** Express 5 _x_^2 14 _x_ 3 in the form _p x_ ^^ + _q_ h^2 + _r_ , where _p_ , _q_ and _r_ are constants. [3] 

 (ii) Sketch the graph of y = 5 x^2 14 x 3 on the axes below. Show clearly any points where your graph meets the coordinate axes. [4] 

 O 

 y 

 x 

 (iii) State the set of values of k for which 5 x^2 14 x 3 = k has exactly four solutions. [2] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/23/M/J/18 

**10** A particle moves in a straight line such that its displacement, _s_ metres, from a fixed point _O_ at time _t_ seconds, is given by _s_ = 4 + cos 3 _t_ , where _t_ H 0. The particle is initially at rest. 

 (i) Find the exact value of t when the particle is next at rest. [2] 

 (ii) Find the distance travelled by the particle between t = 4 r and t = 2 rseconds. [3] 

 (iii) Find the greatest acceleration of the particle. [2] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/23/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**11 (a)** Solve 10 cos 2 _x_ + 3 sin _x_ = 9 for 0 ° 1 _x_ 1 360 °. [5] 

 (b) Solve 3 tan 2 y = 4 sin 2 y for 0 1 y 1 r radians. [5] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/23/M/J/18 

**12** In this question all lengths are in metres. 

 30° 

 x 

 h 

 A B 

 5 C 

 A water container is in the shape of a triangular prism. The diagrams show the container and its cross-section. The cross-section of the water in the container is an isosceles triangle ABC , with angle ABC = angle BAC = 30°. The length of AB is x and the depth of water is h. The length of the container is 5. 

 (i) Show that x = 2 3 h and hence find the volume of water in the container in terms of h. [3] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/23/M/J/18 

 (ii) The container is filled at a rate of 0.5 m^3 per minute. At the instant when h is 0.25 m, find 

 (a) the rate at which h is increasing, [4] 

 (b) the rate at which x is increasing. [2] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/23/M/J/18 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

## BLANK PAGE 


