® IGCSE is the registered trademark of Cambridge International Examinations. 

### CAMBRIDGE INTERNATIONAL EXAMINATIONS 

Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## MARK SCHEME for the May/June 2015 series 

# 0625 PHYSICS 

## 0625/62 Paper 6 (Alternative to Practical), maximum raw mark 40 

This mark scheme is published as an aid to teachers and candidates, to indicate the requirements ofthe examination. It shows the basis on which Examiners were instructed to award marks. It does not indicate the details of the discussions that took place at an Examiners’ meeting before marking began,which would have considered the acceptability of alternative answers. 

Mark schemes should be read in conjunction with the question paper and the Principal ExaminerReport for Teachers. 

Cambridge will not enter into discussions about these mark schemes. Cambridge is publishing the mark schemes for the May/June 2015 series for mostCambridge IGCSE®, Cambridge International A and AS Level components and some Cambridge O Level components. 


 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2015 0625 62 NOTES ABOUT MARK SCHEME SYMBOLS & OTHER MATTERS 

Brackets ( ) around words or units in the mark scheme are intended to indicate wording used toclarify the mark scheme, but the marks do not depend on seeing the words or units in brackets, e.g. 10 (cm) means that the mark is scored for 10, regardless of the unit given. c.a.o. means “correct answer only”. e.c.f. means “error carried forward”. This indicates that if a candidate has made an earliermistake and has carried his incorrect value forward to subsequent stages of working, he may be given marks indicated by e.c.f. provided his subsequent working is correct, bearing in mind his earlier mistake. This prevents a candidate being penalised more thanonce for a particular mistake, but only applies to marks annotated “e.c.f.” 

owtte means “or words to that effect”. Underlining indicates that this must be seen in the answer offered, or something very similar. OR / or indicates alternative answers, any one of which is satisfactory for scoring the mark. AND indicates that both answers are required to score the mark. Spelling Be generous with spelling and use of English. However, do not allow ambiguities. Sig. figs. Candidates are expected to give answers to a suitable precision. The use of an inappropriate number of significant figures will be penalised where indicated in the markscheme. Rounding errors will also be penalised. 

Fractions Fractions are only acceptable where specified. 

Extras (^) which contradict an otherwise correct response, or are forbidden by the mark scheme,If a candidate gives more answers than required, irrelevant extras are ignored; for extras use right plus wrong = 0. Ignore indicates that something which is not correct is disregarded and does not cause a right plus wrong penalty. NOT indicates that an incorrect answer is not to be disregarded, but cancels another otherwise correct alternative offered by the candidate, i.e. right plus wrong penalty applies. 


Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2015 0625 62 1 (a) any one from: 

- reference to how to determine the centre of the bob 

- measure to top of bob then add on half diameter measured with blocks andrule or callipers 

- measure to top and bottom of bob and average 

- reference to perpendicular viewing (reducing parallax) 

- rule parallel with/close to string/appropriate use of set-square [1] 

 (b) (i) t = 28.4(0) NOT 28:4 [1] (ii) T = 1.42 (s) allow ecf from (i) [1] (iii) reduce effect of errors in starting/stopping stopwatch [1] 

 (c) statement to match results (expect no) [1] justification using results, including idea of difference is beyond limits of experimental uncertainty owtte [1] 

 (d) minimum of three more values [1] all values ≥ 20 cm and ≤ 300 cm, and three values are at least 10 cm apart [1] [Total: 8] 

2 (a) (i) θH = 92 (oC) [1] (ii) any one from: 

- wait for thermometer reading to stop rising 

- perpendicular viewing of scale 

- stirring 

- thermometer bulb in middle of water/not touching beaker [1] 

 (b) θA = 21 (°C) allow ecf from (i) [1] 

 (c) θB = 14, correct unit seen, °C or deg C NOT C° or °C, and not contradicted [1] 

 (d) any two from: 

- room temperature/other environmental statement 

- initial hot water temperature 

- heat loss to surroundings /evaporation/conduction through sides of beaker 

- time delays in adding water [max.2] 


 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2015 0625 62 (e) perpendicular viewing/eye level with meniscus [1] reading to bottom of meniscus [1] [Total: 8] 

3 (a) (i) V = 2.4(0) (V) [1] I = 0.84 (A), both units correct [1] (ii) RP = 2.86 OR 2.9 (Ω) ecf (a)(i) [1] 

 (b) lamps in series [1] voltmeter and ammeter in correct position, with rest of circuit and symbols correct [1] 

 (c) RS = 11.4 OR 11 (Ω) NOT more than 3 sig. figs. [1] 

 (d) (i) correct symbol for variable resistor NOT potentiometer [1] (ii) X correctly positioned [1] [Total: 8] 

4 (a) normal labelled NL [1] 

 (b) P 1 P 2 distance > 5 cm, < 30 cm [1] 

 (c) (i) Graph: 

- axes correctly labelled [1] 

- suitable scales [1] 

- all plots correct to ½ small square [1] 

- good line judgement [1] 

- thin, continuous line [1] (ii) no [1] line does not pass through origin [1] (iii) difficulty in aligning pins OR pins too thick OR thickness of mirror [1] [Total: 10] 


Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2015 0625 62 5 (a) f = 15.06(387) [1] final answer given to 2 or 3 significant figures AND unit [1] 

 (b) any two from: 

- darkened room / bright(er) lamp / no other lights 

- moving screen slowly / back and forth to obtain best image 

- mark block to show centre of lens 

- place rule on bench/ clamp rule; 

- lens and object same (vertical) height/level (from bench) 

- lens, object and screen vertical/perpendicular to bench; 

- repeat measurement/experiment (and average) [max.2] 

 (c) any two from: 

- upside down/inverted 

- size/bigger 

- brightness/brighter/dimmer 

- colours seen round edge/edges blurred [max.2]     [Total: 6] 


