 This document consists of 11 printed pages and 1 blank page. DC (RW/SW) 91113/2© UCLES 2015 [Turn over 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

* 6 8 4 6 9 7 3 4 4 2 * **PHYSICS 0625/53** Paper 5 Practical Test **May/June 2015 1 hour 15 minutes** Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: As listed in the Confidential Instructions. **READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST** Write your Centre number, candidate number and name in the spaces at the top of the page.Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs.Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO **NOT** WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. AnswerElectronic calculators may be used. **all** questions. You may lose marks if you do not show your working or if you do not use appropriate units. At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together.The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. 

 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 For Examiner’s Use 1 2 3 4 Total 


© UCLES 2015 0625/53/M/J/15 

**1** In this experiment, you will determine the mass of an object using two strings. The apparatus has been set up for you. **Do not change** the position of the rule or the distance between the stands. You are also provided with two loops of string labelled **P** and **Q**. Carry out the following instructions, referring to Figs. 1.1 and 1.2. 

 string metre rule 

**X** (^) 100 g point A stand point B **Fig. 1.1 (a) (i)** Record the scale reading _a_ 0 on the rule, at point A, where the string crosses the rule, as indicated in Fig. 1.1. _a_ 0 = ............................................................... **(ii)** Record the scale reading _b_ 0 at point B. _b_ 0 = ............................................................... [2] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/53/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

 (b) Carefully place loop P around the vertical strings so that the strings are pulled closer together as shown in Fig. 1.2. The loop must be horizontal and should be just above the rule. 

**X** (^) 100 g loop **P** _d_ A point A 1 point B^1 _d_ B **Fig. 1.2 (i)** Record in Table 1.1 the scale reading _a_ 1 at point A 1 , as indicated in Fig. 1.2. **(ii)** Record in Table 1.1 the scale reading _b_ 1 at point B 1. **Table 1.1** loop _a_ 1 / cm _b_ 1 / cm _d_ A / cm _d_ B / cm _M_ / _g_ **P Q (iii)** Calculate and record in the table the distance _d_ A, as indicated in Fig. 1.2. Use your results from **(a)(i)** and from the table. _d_ A is the difference between _a_ 0 and _a_ 1. **(iv)** Calculate and record the distance _d_ B. Use your results from **(a)(ii)** and from the table. _d_ B is the difference between _b_ 0 and _b_ 1. **(v)** Calculate and record in the table a value for the mass _M_ of object **X** , using your results from the table and the equation _M_ = _k d_^ _d_ AB, where _k_ = 100 g. **(vi)** Remove loop **P** from the vertical strings and replace it with loop **Q**. **(vii)** Repeat steps **(b)(i)** to **(b)(v)** for loop **Q**. [5] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/53/M/J/15 

 (c) Explain how you made sure that the loops were horizontal. You may draw a diagram. 

## ................................................................................................................................................... 

## ................................................................................................................................................... 

## ................................................................................................................................................... 

## ...............................................................................................................................................[1] 

 (d) A student suggests that d A and d B might be directly proportional to each other. Briefly describe how this experiment could be extended to investigate the suggestion. ................................................................................................................................................... ................................................................................................................................................... ...............................................................................................................................................[2] [Total: 10] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/53/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

## BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2015 0625/53/M/J/15 

**2** In this experiment, you will investigate the cooling of water. Carry out the following instructions, referring to Fig. 2.1. 

 thermometer beaker 

 Fig. 2.1 (a) (i) Pour approximately 100 cm^3 of hot water into the beaker. (ii) Read the temperature of the hot water and immediately start the stopclock. In the first row of Table 2.1, record this temperature θ. (iii) Record in the table, the temperature θ of the water at times t = 30 s, 60 s, 90 s, 120 s, 150 s, 180 s, 210 s, 240 s and 270 s. Table 2.1 t / s θ / °C 0 

## [2] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/53/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

 (b) (i) Calculate the average cooling rate x 1 for the first 90 s of the experiment. Use your readings from the table and the equation x 1 = (θ^0 – T^ θ^90 ), where T = 90 s and θ 0 and θ 90 are the temperatures at 0 s and 90 s. Give the unit for the cooling rate. 

 x 1 = ...........................................................[2] (ii) Calculate the average cooling rate x 2 in the next 90 s of the experiment. Use your readings from the table and the equation x 2 = (θ^90 – T^ θ^180 ), where T = 90 s and θ 90 and θ 180 are the temperatures at 90 s and 180 s. 

 x 2 = ...........................................................[1] (iii) Calculate the average cooling rate x 3 in the last 90 s of the experiment. Use your readings from the table and the equation x 3 = (θ^180 – T^ θ^270 ), where T = 90 s and θ 180 and θ 270 are the temperatures at 180 s and 270 s. 

 x 3 = ...........................................................[1] (c) Use your results from (b) to predict the average cooling rate x 4 for the next 90 s, if the experiment had been carried on for a longer time. Justify your prediction by reference to your results. prediction for x 4 = ............................................... justification ................................................................................................................................ ................................................................................................................................................... ................................................................................................................................................... [2] (d) State one precaution which you took to ensure that the temperature readings were as reliable as possible. ................................................................................................................................................... ...............................................................................................................................................[1] (e) A student wishes to find out if a similar pattern of results might be obtained under different conditions. State a variable which he could change in your experiment to explore this. ...............................................................................................................................................[1] [Total: 10] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/53/M/J/15 

**3** In this experiment, you will determine the resistance per unit length of a wire. The circuit has been set up for you as shown in Fig. 3.1. Carry out the following instructions, referring to Fig. 3.1. 

## A 

## V 

## T 

 power supply 

 crocodile clip 

 metre rule resistance wire Fig. 3.1 (a) (i) Connect the crocodile clip to a length l of the resistance wire where l = 0.900 m measured from the end T. Switch on. Measure, and record in Table 3.1, the potential difference V and the current I. Switch off. (ii) Repeat (a)(i) for l = 0.800 m, 0.700 m, 0.600 m and 0.500 m. Table 3.1 l / m V / V I / A R / Ω 0.900 0.800 0.700 0.600 0.500 [2] (b) Calculate, and record in the table, the resistance R of each length of the wire, using the equation R = V I. [1] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/53/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

 (c) Plot a graph of R / Ω ( y -axis) against l / m ( xaxis). 

## [4] 

 (d) (i) Determine the gradient G of the graph. Show clearly on the graph how you obtained the necessary information. 

## G = ...........................................................[1] 

 (ii) For this experiment and wire, the resistance per unit length r of the wire is numerically equal to G. Give a value for r , to a suitable number of significant figures for this experiment. Include the unit. r = ...........................................................[2] [Total: 10] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/53/M/J/15 

**4** In this experiment, you will determine the focal length of a converging lens by two methods. Carry out the following instructions, referring to Figs. 4.1 and 4.2. illuminatedobject _f_^ _D_ lens 

 mirror 

 card C Fig. 4.1 (a) (i) Arrange the illuminated object, lens and mirror as shown in Fig. 4.1. Set the distance D between the mirror and the illuminated object to 20 cm. (ii) Move the lens until a sharp image appears on the front of the card C by the side of the illuminated object. (iii) Measure, and record in Table 4.1, the distance f between the lens and the illuminated object. f is a value for the focal length of the lens in this experiment. Table 4.1 D / cm f / cm 20 40 [1] (b) (i) Repeat steps (a)(i) to (a)(iii) for a distance D = 40 cm. (ii) Use your results from the table to calculate F 1 , an average value for f. 

## F 1 = ...........................................................[1] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/53/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

 (c) (i) Set up the lens, illuminated object and screen as shown in Fig. 4.2. illuminatedobject u lens 

 v screen 

 Fig. 4.2 (ii) Set the distance u between the illuminated object and the lens to 20.0 cm. (iii) Move the screen until a sharp image of the illuminated object appears on the screen. (iv) Measure, and record in Table 4.2, the distance v between the lens and the screen. Table 4.2 u / cm v / cm f / cm 20.0 30.0 [3] (v) Repeat steps (c)(ii) to (c)(iv) for a value of u = 30.0 cm. (vi) For each value of u , calculate and record in the table the focal length f , using your results 

from the table and the equation _f_ = (^) ( _uuv_ + _v_ ). **(d) (i)** Use your results from Table 4.2 to calculate _F_ 2 , a second average value for _f_. 

## F 2 = ...........................................................[1] 

 (ii) A student suggests that F 1 and F 2 should be equal. State whether your findings support this suggestion. Justify your statement by reference to your results. statement .......................................................................................................................... justification ........................................................................................................................ ........................................................................................................................................... [2] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/53/M/J/15 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonableeffort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge InternationalExaminations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge LocalExaminations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

 (e) Describe two precautions you took in order to obtain reliable results in this experiment. 

1. ............................................................................................................................................... ................................................................................................................................................... 

2. ............................................................................................................................................... ...................................................................................................................................................     [2] [Total: 10] 


