 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 16 printed pages. 

 IB16 06_0620_11/4RP © UCLES 2016 [Turn over 

# *0022143872* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/11 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) May/June 2016 

 45 Minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A, B, C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/11/M/J/16 

1 In which changes do the particles move further apart? 

 W X gas liquid solid Y Z 

 A W and X B W and Z C X and Y D Y and Z 

2 A sample of a dye is investigated by chromatography. 

 A line is drawn across a piece of chromatography paper and a spot of the dye is placed on it. 

 The paper is placed in water. 

 water 

 chromatography paper 

 spot of dye line 

 Which row is correct? 

 what is used to draw the line position of spot 

 A ink above the level of the water 

 B ink below the level of the water 

 C pencil above the level of the water 

 D pencil below the level of the water 

3 One of the instructions for an experiment reads as follows. 

 Quickly add 50 cm^3 of acid. 

 What is the best piece of apparatus to use? 

 A a burette 

 B a conical flask 

 C a measuring cylinder 

 D a pipette 


© UCLES 2016 0620/11/M/J/16 [Turn over 

4 Diamond and graphite are macromolecules. 

 Which statement about diamond and graphite is not correct? 

 A They are giant structures with high melting points. 

 B They are non-conductors of electricity. 

 C They contain only atoms of a non-metal. 

 D They have covalent bonds between the atoms. 

5 The table shows the electronic structure of four atoms. 

 atom electronic structure 

 W 2,8,1 

 X 2,8,4 

 Y 2,8,7 

 Z 2,8,8 

 Which two atoms combine to form a covalent compound? 

 A W and X B W and Y C X and Y D X and Z 

6 An aluminium atom has a nucleon number of 27 and a proton number of 13. 

 How many neutrons does this aluminium atom contain? 

 A 13 B 14 C 27 D 40 

7 What happens when a bond is formed between a green gaseous element and a soft metallic element? 

 A The gas atoms gain an electron. 

 B The gas atoms lose an electron. 

 C The metal atoms gain an electron. 

 D The two elements share a pair of electrons. 

8 The equation shows the reaction between magnesium and sulfuric acid. [Ar: H, 1; O, 16; Mg, 24; S, 32] 

 Mg + H 2 SO 4 → MgSO 4 + H 2 

 In this reaction, which mass of magnesium sulfate is formed when 6 g of magnesium react with excess sulfuric acid? 

 A 8 B 24 C 30 D 60 


© UCLES 2016 0620/11/M/J/16 

9 The diagram shows an electrical cable. 

 metal core 

 plastic coating 

 Which statement about the substances used is correct? 

 A The coating is plastic because it conducts electricity well. 

 B The core is copper because it conducts electricity well. 

 C The core is copper because it is cheap and strong. 

 D The core is iron because it is cheap and strong. 

10 When substance X is electrolysed, the amount of gases P and Q formed is shown. 

 P Q 

# – + 

 substance X 

 What is substance X? 

 A concentrated aqueous sodium chloride 

 B concentrated hydrochloric acid 

 C dilute sulfuric acid 

# D molten lead(II) bromide 


© UCLES 2016 0620/11/M/J/16 [Turn over 

11 The energy level diagram for the reaction between sodium hydrogen carbonate and dilute hydrochloric acid is shown. 

 sodium chloride + water + carbon dioxide 

 sodium hydrogen carbonate + dilute hydrochloric acid 

 energy 

 Which row correctly describes the type of reaction and the energy of the reactants and products? 

 type of reaction 

 energy of the reactants and products 

 A endothermic the products have more energy than the reactants 

 B endothermic the reactants have more energy than the products 

 C exothermic the products have more energy than the reactants 

 D exothermic the reactants have more energy than the products 

12 The diagram shows some properties that substances may have. 

 To which labelled part of the diagram does 235 U belong? 

 compound 

 used as an energy source 

 radioactive 

## A 

## B D 

## C 


© UCLES 2016 0620/11/M/J/16 

13 A liquid X reacts with solid Y to form a gas. 

 Which two diagrams show suitable methods for investigating the rate (speed) of the reaction? 

## X 

## Y 

## X 

 cotton wool cotton wool 

## 1 2 

## 3 4 

## Y 

## X 

## Y 

## X 

## Y 

 stopper 

 balance 

 balance 

 stopper 

 A 1 and 3 B 1 and 4 C 2 and 3 D 2 and 4 


© UCLES 2016 0620/11/M/J/16 [Turn over 

14 An experiment, S, is carried out to measure the volume of hydrogen produced when excess dilute sulfuric acid is added to zinc. 

 A second experiment, T, is carried out using the same mass of zinc but under different conditions. 

 The results of the two experiments are shown. 

## 0 

## 0 

 time 

 total volume of hydrogen 

## S 

## T 

 Which changes in the conditions between experiments S and T give curve T? 

 addition of a catalyst 

 the zinc is in large pieces not powdered 

 A   

 B   

 C   

 D   

# 15 Aluminium reacts with iron(III) oxide as shown. 

# iron(III) oxide + aluminium → iron + aluminium oxide 

 Which statement about this reaction is correct? 

 A Aluminium is oxidised. 

 B Aluminium oxide is reduced. 

# C Iron(III) oxide is oxidised. 

 D Iron is oxidised. 

16 Which reaction is reversible? 

 A Cu + ZnSO 4 → CuSO 4 + Zn 

 B CuO + H 2 SO 4 → CuSO 4 + H 2 O 

 C CuO + H 2 → Cu + H 2 O 

 D CuSO 4 .5H 2 O → CuSO 4 + 5H 2 O 


© UCLES 2016 0620/11/M/J/16 

17 Which statements are properties of an acid? 

 1 reacts with ammonium sulfate to form ammonia 

 2 turns red litmus blue 

## 1 2 

## A   

## B   

## C   

## D   

18 Part of the Periodic Table is shown. 

 Which element forms an acidic oxide? 

## A B C 

## D 

# 19 A method used to make copper(II) sulfate crystals is shown. 

 1 Place dilute sulfuric acid in a beaker. 

 2 Warm the acid. 

# 3 Add copper(II) oxide until it is in excess. 

 4 Filter the mixture. 

 5 Evaporate the filtrate until crystals start to form. 

 6 Leave the filtrate to cool. 

 What are the purposes of step 3 and step 4? 

 step 3 step 4 

# A to ensure all of the acid has reacted to obtain solid copper(II) sulfate 

# B to ensure all of the acid has reacted to remove excess copper(II) oxide 

# C to speed up the reaction to obtain solid copper(II) sulfate 

# D to speed up the reaction to remove excess copper(II) oxide 


© UCLES 2016 0620/11/M/J/16 [Turn over 

20 The results of two tests on solid X are shown. 

 test observation 

 aqueous sodium hydroxide added green precipitate formed 

 acidified silver nitrate added yellow precipitate formed 

 What is X? 

# A copper(II) chloride 

# B copper(II) iodide 

# C iron(II) chloride 

# D iron(II) iodide 

21 Where in the Periodic Table is the metallic character of the elements greatest? 

 left or right side of a period 

 at the top or bottom of a group 

 A left bottom 

 B left top 

 C right bottom 

 D right top 

22 Some properties of four elements, P, Q, R and S, are shown in the table. 

 Two of these elements are in Group I of the Periodic Table and two are in Group VII. 

element reaction with water (^) room temperaturephysical state at P reacts vigorously solid Q does not react with water solid R reacts explosively solid S dissolves giving a coloured solution liquid Which statement is correct? A P is below R in Group I. B Q is above R in Group I. C Q is below S in Group VII. D R is below S in Group VII. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/11/M/J/16 

23 Which of the following could be a transition element? 

 melting point in °C 

 density in g / cm^3 

 colour electrical conductor 

 A 114 4.9 purple no 

 B 659 2.7 grey yes 

 C 1677 4.5 grey yes 

 D 3727 2.3 black yes 

24 Two statements about argon are given. 

 1 Argon has a full outer shell of electrons. 

 2 Argon is very reactive and is used in lamps. 

 Which is correct? 

 A Both statements are correct and statement 2 explains statement 1. 

 B Both statements are correct but statement 2 does not explain statement 1. 

 C Statement 1 is correct but statement 2 is incorrect. 

 D Statement 2 is correct but statement 1 is incorrect. 

25 Three students, X, Y and Z, were told that solid P reacts with dilute acids and also conducts electricity. 

 The table shows the students’ suggestions about the identity of P. 

## X Y Z 

 copper iron graphite 

 Which of the students are correct? 

 A X, Y and Z B X only C Y only D Z only 


© UCLES 2016 0620/11/M/J/16 [Turn over 

26 W, X and Y are metals, one of which is copper and one of which is iron. 

- W has a coloured oxide which can be reduced by carbon. 

- X has a black oxide and is also found in nature as a pure metal. 

- Y has an oxide which cannot be reduced by carbon. 

 Which metal is the most reactive and what is the possible identity of W? 

 most reactive metal 

 possible identity of W 

 A X Cu 

 B X Fe 

 C Y Cu 

 D Y Fe 

27 Tin is a metal that is less reactive than iron and is extracted from its ore cassiterite, SnO 2. 

 Which statements about tin are correct? 

 1 Tin can be extracted from cassiterite using carbon. 

 2 Tin does not conduct electricity. 

 3 Tin is hard and shiny. 

 A 1, 2 and 3 B 1 and 2 only C 1 and 3 only D 2 and 3 only 

28 Which statement about the uses of metals is correct? 

 A Aluminium is used in the manufacture of aircraft because of its strength and high density. 

 B Copper is used in electrical wiring because of its strength and high density. 

 C Mild steel is used in the manufacture of car bodies because of its strength and resistance to corrosion. 

 D Stainless steel is used in the construction of chemical plant because of its strength and resistance to corrosion. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/11/M/J/16 

29 The diagram shows an experiment to investigate how paint affects the rusting of iron. 

 air 

## P Q 

 water 

 iron painted iron 

 What happens to the water level in tubes P and Q? 

 tube P tube Q 

 A falls rises 

 B no change rises 

 C rises falls 

 D rises no change 

30 A new planet has been discovered and its atmosphere has been analysed. 

 atmosphere 

 planet 

 The table shows the composition of its atmosphere. 

 gas percentage by volume 

 carbon dioxide 4 

 nitrogen 72 

 oxygen 24 

 Which gases are present in the atmosphere of the planet in a higher percentage than they are in the Earth’s atmosphere? 

 A carbon dioxide and oxygen 

 B carbon dioxide only 

 C nitrogen and oxygen 

 D nitrogen only 


© UCLES 2016 0620/11/M/J/16 [Turn over 

# 31 Water was added to separate samples of anhydrous cobalt(II) chloride and anhydrous 

# copper(II) sulfate. 

 Which row describes the colour changes that take place in these reactions? 

# cobalt(II) chloride copper(II) sulfate 

 A blue to pink blue to white 

 B blue to pink white to blue 

 C pink to blue blue to white 

 D pink to blue white to blue 

32 Which pollutant found in air does not have an effect on respiration? 

 A carbon monoxide 

 B lead compounds 

 C oxides of nitrogen 

 D sulfur dioxide 

33 A farmer’s soil is very low in both nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P). 

 Which fertiliser would improve the quality of this soil most effectively? 

 percentage 

 nitrogen (N) phosphorus (P) potassium (K) 

 A 11 11 27 

 B 12 37 10 

 C 28 10 10 

 D 31 29 9 

34 When limestone is heated it forms lime (calcium oxide) and carbon dioxide. 

 CaCO 3 (s) → CaO(s) + CO 2 (g) 

 Which statement is not correct? 

 A Carbon dioxide is a greenhouse gas which may contribute to climate change. 

 B Slaked lime is used to neutralise industrial waste. 

 C The lime can be used to treat alkaline soil. 

 D This reaction is an example of thermal decomposition. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/11/M/J/16 

35 The diagram shows the separation of petroleum into fractions. 

 gasoline 

## X 

## Y 

## Z 

 bitumen 

 petroleum 

 What could X, Y and Z represent? 

## X Y Z 

 A diesel oil lubricating fraction paraffin 

 B lubricating fraction diesel oil paraffin 

 C paraffin lubricating fraction diesel oil 

 D paraffin diesel oil lubricating fraction 

36 Which of the compounds shown are in the same homologous series? 

 1 CH 3 OH 

 2 CH 3 CH 2 OH 

 3 CH 3 COOH 

 4 CH 3 CH 2 CH 2 OH 

 A 1, 2 and 3 B 1, 2 and 4 C 1, 3 and 4 D 2, 3 and 4 

37 Compound Q decolourises bromine water. 

 Compound Q has two carbon atoms in each molecule. 

 Which statement about compound Q is correct? 

 A It contains carbon-hydrogen double bonds. 

 B It has six hydrogen atoms per molecule. 

 C It has two carbon-carbon double bonds. 

 D It is produced by cracking alkanes. 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2016 0620/11/M/J/16 

38 What is used in the production of ethanol from ethene? 

 A hydrogen and oxygen 

 B oxygen only 

 C steam 

 D yeast 

39 Ethene forms an addition polymer as shown. 

 H 

## ...... + C 

## H 

## H 

## C + 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C + ...... ...... ...... 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

 Which terms describe this polymer? 

 A a saturated compound called poly(ethane) 

 B a saturated compound called poly(ethene) 

 C an unsaturated compound called poly(ethane) 

 D an unsaturated compound called poly(ethene) 

40 The diagram shows a molecule of an organic compound W. 

## H C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## OH 

## O 

 Which statement is not correct? 

 A A solution of W in water has a pH greater than pH 7. 

 B A solution of W in water reacts with sodium hydroxide solution. 

# C When copper(II) carbonate is added to a solution of W in water, a gas is produced. 

 D When magnesium is added to a solution of W in water, a gas is produced. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/11/M/J/16 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements 

(^1) H hydrogen 1 (^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III IV V VI VII VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Be beryllium 9 atomic number atomic symbol **Key**^ name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mg magnesium 24 19 K potassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rb rubidium 85 (^38) Sr strontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Fr francium 

- 

(^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Ge germanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 22 Tititanium (^4840) Zr zirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rf rutherfordium 

- 

 23 V vanadium 

(^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Cr chromium (^5242) Mo molybdenum (^9674) W tungsten^184106 Sgseaborgium 

- 

(^25) Mn manganese (^5543) Tc technetium – (^75) Re rhenium^186107 Bhbohrium 

- 

(^26) Feiron (^5644) Ru ruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Iriridium (^192109) Mt meitnerium 

- 

(^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pd palladium^106 (^78) Ptplatinum (^195110) Ds darmstadtium 

- 

(^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rg roentgenium 

- 

(^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cd cadmium^112 (^80) Hgmercury (^201112) Cn copernicium 

- 

 114 F l flerovium– 

 116 Lv livermorium 

- 

(^7) N nitrogen^1415 Pphosphorus^3133 Asarsenic^7551 Sbantimony^12283 Bibismuth^209 (^8) O oxygen^1616 Ssulfur^3234 Seselenium^7952 Tetellurium^12884 Popolonium 

- 

(^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5^35 Brbromine^8053 I iodine 12785 At astatine 

- 

(^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Sc scandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71 lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) La lanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.) actinium 

- 

(^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium (^14191) Pa protactinium 231 (^60) Nd neodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pm promethium – (^93) Np neptunium 

- 

(^62) Sm samarium^150 (^94) Pu plutonium 

- 

(^63) Eu europium^152 (^95) Am americium 

- 

(^64) Gd gadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bk berkelium 

- 

(^66) Dy dysprosium 16398 Cf californium 

- 

(^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Es einsteinium 

- 

(^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Md mendelevium 

- 

(^70) Yb ytterbium^173102 Nonobelium 

- 

(^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lr lawrencium 

- 


