 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 17 printed pages and 3 blank pages. 

 IB16 06_0620_12/3RP © UCLES 2016 [Turn over 

# *2847144730* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/12 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) May/June 2016 

 45 Minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A, B, C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 20. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/12/M/J/16 

1 In which changes do the particles move further apart? 

 W X gas liquid solid Y Z 

 A W and X B W and Z C X and Y D Y and Z 

2 In the chromatography experiment shown, which label represents the solvent front? 

## C 

## D 

## B 

## A 

3 One of the instructions for an experiment reads as follows. 

 Quickly add 50 cm^3 of acid. 

 What is the best piece of apparatus to use? 

 A a burette 

 B a conical flask 

 C a measuring cylinder 

 D a pipette 

4 Two statements about diamond are given. 

 1 Diamond has a giant three-dimensional covalent structure of carbon atoms. 

 2 Diamond is one of the hardest substances known. 

 Which is correct? 

 A Both statements are correct and statement 1 explains statement 2. 

 B Both statements are correct but statement 2 does not explain statement 1. 

 C Statement 1 is correct but statement 2 is incorrect. 

 D Statement 2 is correct but statement 1 is incorrect. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/12/M/J/16 [Turn over 

5 The table shows the electronic structure of four atoms. 

 atom electronic structure 

 W 2,8,1 

 X 2,8,4 

 Y 2,8,7 

 Z 2,8,8 

 Which two atoms combine to form a covalent compound? 

 A W and X B W and Y C X and Y D X and Z 

6 An atom of element Q contains 19 electrons, 19 protons and 20 neutrons. 

 What is Q? 

 A calcium 

 B potassium 

 C strontium 

 D yttrium 

7 Lithium is in Group I of the Periodic Table. Nitrogen is in Group V of the Periodic Table. 

 Lithium reacts with nitrogen to form the ionic compound lithium nitride. 

 What happens to the electrons when lithium atoms and nitrogen atoms form ions? 

 lithium atoms nitrogen atoms 

 A each lithium atom loses one electron to form a Li+^ ion 

 each nitrogen atom gains three electrons to form an N3–^ ion 

 B each lithium atom loses one electron to form a Li+^ ion 

 each nitrogen atom gains five electrons to form an N5–^ ion 

 C each lithium atom gains one electron to form a Li–^ ion 

 each nitrogen atom loses three electrons to form an N3+^ ion 

 D each lithium atom gains one electron to form a Li–^ ion 

 each nitrogen atom loses five electrons to form an N5+^ ion 


© UCLES 2016 0620/12/M/J/16 

8 The equation shows the reaction between magnesium and sulfuric acid. [Ar: H, 1; O, 16; Mg, 24; S, 32] 

 Mg + H 2 SO 4 → MgSO 4 + H 2 

 In this reaction, which mass of magnesium sulfate is formed when 6 g of magnesium react with excess sulfuric acid? 

 A 8 B 24 C 30 D 60 

9 The diagram shows an electrical cable. 

 metal core 

 plastic coating 

 Which statement about the substances used is correct? 

 A The coating is plastic because it conducts electricity well. 

 B The core is copper because it conducts electricity well. 

 C The core is copper because it is cheap and strong. 

 D The core is iron because it is cheap and strong. 

10 What are the products at the electrodes when dilute sulfuric acid is electrolysed using inert electrodes? 

 anode cathode 

 A hydrogen oxygen 

 B oxygen hydrogen 

 C sulfur oxygen 

 D sulfur dioxide hydrogen 


© UCLES 2016 0620/12/M/J/16 [Turn over 

11 The energy level diagram for the reaction between magnesium and hydrochloric acid is shown. 

 Mg + 2HC l 

MgC _l_ (^) 2 + H 2 energy Which statement about the reaction is not correct? A Energy is given out during the reaction. B The products are at a lower energy level than the reactants. C The reaction is endothermic. D The temperature increases during the reaction. 12 The diagram shows some properties that substances may have. To which labelled part of the diagram does 235 U belong? compound used as an energy source radioactive 

## A 

## B D 

## C 


© UCLES 2016 0620/12/M/J/16 

13 A liquid X reacts with solid Y to form a gas. 

 Which two diagrams show suitable methods for investigating the rate (speed) of the reaction? 

## X 

## Y 

## X 

 cotton wool cotton wool 

## 1 2 

## 3 4 

## Y 

## X 

## Y 

## X 

## Y 

 stopper 

 balance 

 balance 

 stopper 

 A 1 and 3 B 1 and 4 C 2 and 3 D 2 and 4 


© UCLES 2016 0620/12/M/J/16 [Turn over 

14 The results of two separate reactions between excess calcium carbonate and hydrochloric acid are shown. 

 volume of gas collected 

 time 

 first reaction 

 second reaction 

## 0 

## 0 

 Which statement explains the differences between the reactions? 

 A More calcium carbonate was used in the second reaction. 

 B The same volume of more concentrated acid was used in the second reaction. 

 C The second reaction was allowed to react for longer. 

 D The temperature was higher in the second reaction. 

15 The equations below all show redox reactions. 

 Fe 2 O 3 + 3CO → 2Fe + 3CO 2 

 2ZnO + C → 2Zn + CO 2 

 Fe 2 O 3 + 2Al → Al 2 O 3 + 2Fe 

 2CO + 2NO → 2CO 2 + N 2 

 Which oxide is oxidised in these reactions? 

 A Fe 2 O 3 B CO C ZnO D NO 

16 In which reaction is the colour change from blue to white? 

# A heating hydrated cobalt(II) chloride 

# B heating hydrated copper(II) sulfate 

# C adding water to anhydrous cobalt(II) chloride 

# D adding water to anhydrous copper(II) sulfate 


© UCLES 2016 0620/12/M/J/16 

17 Which statements are properties of an acid? 

 1 reacts with ammonium sulfate to form ammonia 

 2 turns red litmus blue 

## 1 2 

## A   

## B   

## C   

## D   

18 Part of the Periodic Table is shown. 

 Which element forms an acidic oxide? 

## A 

## B C D 

# 19 What is the correct sequence of steps for the preparation of a pure sample of copper(II) sulfate 

# crystals from copper(II) oxide and sulfuric acid? 

 A dissolving → crystallisation → evaporation → filtration 

 B dissolving → evaporation → filtration → crystallisation 

 C dissolving → filtration → crystallisation → evaporation 

 D dissolving → filtration → evaporation → crystallisation 


© UCLES 2016 0620/12/M/J/16 [Turn over 

20 The following tests are carried out on an aqueous solution of salt X. 

 test observation 

 sodium hydroxide solution is added a green precipitate is formed which dissolves in excess 

 a small piece of aluminium foil is then added to the mixture and the mixture is heated 

 a gas is given off which turns damp, red litmus paper blue 

 What is X? 

 A aluminium nitrate 

 B ammonium sulfate 

# C chromium(III) nitrate 

# D iron(II) nitrate 

21 Where in the Periodic Table is the metallic character of the elements greatest? 

 left or right side of a period 

 at the top or bottom of a group 

 A left bottom 

 B left top 

 C right bottom 

 D right top 

22 Rubidium is a Group I metal. 

 Which statement about rubidium is not correct? 

 A It has a higher melting point than lithium. 

 B It has one electron in its outer shell. 

 C It reacts vigorously with water. 

 D It reacts with chlorine to form rubidium chloride, RbCl. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/12/M/J/16 

23 The table gives information about four elements, P, Q, R and S. 

 melting point in °C 

 electrical conductivity of element when solid 

 density in g / cm^3 colour of iodide of element 

 P 98 good 0.97 white 

 Q –39 good 13.53 red 

 R 1410 poor 2.33 colourless 

 S 1535 good 7.87 green 

 Which elements could be transition elements? 

 A P, Q and S B Q and S only C R and S only D S only 

24 Part of the Periodic Table is shown. 

 Which element is a gas that does not form a compound with potassium? 

## A B 

## C D 

25 Which property is not considered a typical metallic property? 

 A good conductor of heat 

 B low melting point 

 C malleable (can be hammered into shape) 

 D strong 


© UCLES 2016 0620/12/M/J/16 [Turn over 

26 Some chemical properties of three metals W, X and Y and their oxides are shown. 

 metal reaction with steam reaction with dilute hydrochloric acid 

 reaction of metal oxide with carbon 

 W reacts reacts reacts 

 X no reaction no reaction reacts 

 Y reacts reacts no reaction 

 What is the order of reactivity of these metals, most reactive first? 

 A W → Y → X 

 B X → Y → W 

 C Y → W → X 

 D Y → X → W 

27 Iron from a blast furnace is treated with oxygen and with calcium oxide to make steel. 

 Which substances in the iron are removed? 

 oxygen removes 

 calcium oxide removes 

 A carbon acidic oxides 

 B carbon basic oxides 

 C iron acidic oxides 

 D iron basic oxides 

28 Copper is sometimes used to make cooking utensils. 

 saucepan 

 gas ring 

 Three properties of copper are given. 

 1 corrosion resistant 

 2 good conductor of electricity 

 3 good conductor of heat 

 Which properties make copper a suitable metal for making cooking utensils? 

 A 1 and 3 B 1 only C 2 and 3 D 2 only 


© UCLES 2016 0620/12/M/J/16 

29 The diagram shows an experiment to investigate how paint affects the rusting of iron. 

 air 

## P Q 

 water 

 iron painted iron 

 What happens to the water level in tubes P and Q? 

 tube P tube Q 

 A falls rises 

 B no change rises 

 C rises falls 

 D rises no change 

30 A new planet has been discovered and its atmosphere has been analysed. 

 atmosphere 

 planet 

 The table shows the composition of its atmosphere. 

 gas percentage by volume 

 carbon dioxide 4 

 nitrogen 72 

 oxygen 24 

 Which gases are present in the atmosphere of the planet in a higher percentage than they are in the Earth’s atmosphere? 

 A carbon dioxide and oxygen 

 B carbon dioxide only 

 C nitrogen and oxygen 

 D nitrogen only 


© UCLES 2016 0620/12/M/J/16 [Turn over 

31 Which of the following are tests for water? 

# 1 It turns anhydrous copper(II) sulfate blue. 

 2 It boils at 100 °C. 

# 3 It turns anhydrous cobalt(II) chloride paper blue. 

 A 1, 2 and 3 B 1 and 2 only C 1 and 3 only D 2 and 3 only 

32 Sulfur dioxide, carbon monoxide and oxides of nitrogen are common gaseous pollutants found in the air. 

 Which pollutants contribute to acid rain? 

 A carbon monoxide and sulfur dioxide 

 B oxides of nitrogen and sulfur dioxide 

 C oxides of nitrogen only 

 D sulfur dioxide only 

33 Which compound is not used as a fertiliser? 

 A ammonium phosphate 

 B ammonium sulfate 

 C calcium carbonate 

 D potassium nitrate 

34 Lime (calcium oxide) is used to treat waste water from a factory. 

 Which substance is removed by the lime? 

 A ammonia 

 B sodium chloride 

 C sodium hydroxide 

 D sulfuric acid 


© UCLES 2016 0620/12/M/J/16 

35 The diagram shows the separation of petroleum into fractions. 

 gasoline 

## X 

## Y 

## Z 

 bitumen 

 petroleum 

 What could X, Y and Z represent? 

## X Y Z 

 A diesel oil lubricating fraction paraffin 

 B lubricating fraction diesel oil paraffin 

 C paraffin lubricating fraction diesel oil 

 D paraffin diesel oil lubricating fraction 

36 Which compound is not an alkane, CnH2n+2? 

 A CH 3 CH 2 CH 2 CH 3 

 B (CH 3 ) 2 CHCH 3 

 C CH 3 CHCHCH 3 

 D (CH 3 ) 3 CH 


© UCLES 2016 0620/12/M/J/16 [Turn over 

37 A hydrocarbon W burns to form carbon dioxide and water. 

 W decolourises bromine water. 

 What is the name of W and what is its structure? 

 name of W structure of W 

 A ethane C 

## H 

## H H 

## H 

## C 

## H H 

 B ethane C^ C 

 H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

 C ethene C 

## H 

## H H 

## H 

## C 

## H H 

 D ethene C^ C 

 H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

38 Which term describes the formation of ethanol from glucose? 

 A cracking 

 B distillation 

 C fermentation 

 D polymerisation 


© UCLES 2016 0620/12/M/J/16 

39 Ethene forms an addition polymer as shown. 

 H 

## ...... + C 

## H 

## H 

## C + 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C + ...... ...... ...... 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

 Which terms describe this polymer? 

 A a saturated compound called poly(ethane) 

 B a saturated compound called poly(ethene) 

 C an unsaturated compound called poly(ethane) 

 D an unsaturated compound called poly(ethene) 

40 Which statement about carboxylic acids is not correct? 

 A Aqueous ethanoic acid has a pH below pH 7. 

 B They contain the functional group –COOH. 

 C They produce carbon dioxide when reacted with a metal carbonate. 

 D Methyl orange turns yellow in aqueous ethanoic acid. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/12/M/J/16 

## BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2016 0620/12/M/J/16 

## BLANK PAGE 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2016 0620/12/M/J/16 

## BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2016 0620/12/M/J/16 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements 

(^1) H hydrogen 1 (^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III IV V VI VII VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Be beryllium 9 atomic number atomic symbol **Key**^ name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mg magnesium 24 19 K potassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rb rubidium 85 (^38) Sr strontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Fr francium 

- 

(^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Ge germanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 22 Tititanium (^4840) Zr zirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rf rutherfordium 

- 

 23 V vanadium 

(^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Cr chromium (^5242) Mo molybdenum (^9674) W tungsten^184106 Sgseaborgium 

- 

(^25) Mn manganese (^5543) Tc technetium – (^75) Re rhenium^186107 Bhbohrium 

- 

(^26) Feiron (^5644) Ru ruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Iriridium (^192109) Mt meitnerium 

- 

(^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pd palladium^106 (^78) Ptplatinum (^195110) Ds darmstadtium 

- 

(^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rg roentgenium 

- 

(^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cd cadmium^112 (^80) Hgmercury (^201112) Cn copernicium 

- 

 114 F l flerovium– 

 116 Lv livermorium 

- 

(^7) N nitrogen^1415 Pphosphorus^3133 Asarsenic^7551 Sbantimony^12283 Bibismuth^209 (^8) O oxygen^1616 Ssulfur^3234 Seselenium^7952 Tetellurium^12884 Popolonium 

- 

(^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5^35 Brbromine^8053 I iodine 12785 At astatine 

- 

(^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Sc scandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71 lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) La lanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.) actinium 

- 

(^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium (^14191) Pa protactinium 231 (^60) Nd neodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pm promethium – (^93) Np neptunium 

- 

(^62) Sm samarium^150 (^94) Pu plutonium 

- 

(^63) Eu europium^152 (^95) Am americium 

- 

(^64) Gd gadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bk berkelium 

- 

(^66) Dy dysprosium 16398 Cf californium 

- 

(^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Es einsteinium 

- 

(^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Md mendelevium 

- 

(^70) Yb ytterbium^173102 Nonobelium 

- 

(^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lr lawrencium 

- 


