 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 17 printed pages and 3 blank pages. 

 IB17 03_0610_12/2RP © UCLES 2017 [Turn over 

# *1962770622* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## BIOLOGY 0610/12 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) February/March 2017 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A, B, C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2017 0610/12/F/M/17 

1 The drawing shows a ground squirrel. 

 Which feature identifies this animal as a mammal? 

 A eye 

 B four limbs 

 C fur 

 D tail 

2 The diagram shows how a seed changes after it is planted in soil and watered. 

 Which characteristics of living things are demonstrated by this sequence? 

 A excretion and growth 

 B growth and sensitivity 

 C nutrition and reproduction 

 D nutrition and sensitivity 


© UCLES 2017 0610/12/F/M/17 [Turn over 

3 The diagram shows a palisade cell from a leaf. 

 How does a palisade cell differ from the other cells in the same plant? 

 A It has a cell wall. 

 B It has a nucleus. 

 C It has a smaller vacuole. 

 D It has more chloroplasts. 

4 The diagram shows some cells. 

 cilia 

 cytoplasm 

 nucleus 

 Where are these cells found? 

 A alimentary canal 

 B blood 

 C bronchus 

 D plant roots 

5 The length of a specimen in a photograph is 45 mm. Its actual length is 25 mm. 

 What is the magnification of the photograph? 

 A ×0.6 B ×1.6 C ×1.8 D × 1125 


© UCLES 2017 0610/12/F/M/17 

6 The diagram shows a section through a leaf. 

 Which arrow shows the direction of diffusion of carbon dioxide on a sunny day? 

## D 

## C 

## B 

## A 

7 The diagram represents two liquids, separated by a membrane through which osmosis can occur. 

 left right 

 membrane 

 key 

 molecule of water 

 molecule of dissolved sustance 

 Which statement describes how the molecules will move? 

 A Molecules of dissolved substance move from left to right. 

 B Molecules of dissolved substance move from right to left. 

 C Overall, water molecules move from left to right. 

 D Overall, water molecules move from right to left. 


© UCLES 2017 0610/12/F/M/17 [Turn over 

8 Which element is found in proteins but not carbohydrates? 

 A carbon 

 B hydrogen 

 C nitrogen 

 D oxygen 

9 Two samples of a human enzyme were used in an experiment. Before they were used 

 ● sample X was heated to 80 °C and then cooled to 37 °C, 

 ● sample Y was cooled to 0 °C and then heated to 37 °C. 

 How will this affect their activity? 

 A Sample X and sample Y are no longer active. 

 B Sample X and sample Y will be equally active. 

 C Sample X will be more active than sample Y. 

 D Sample Y will be more active than sample X. 

10 Which substances are used for photosynthesis? 

 A carbon dioxide and glucose 

 B carbon dioxide and water 

 C glucose and oxygen 

 D glucose and water 

11 Which term is defined as the taking of substances into the body through the mouth? 

 A absorption 

 B assimilation 

 C digestion 

 D ingestion 

12 What is needed to make the haemoglobin in red blood cells? 

 A calcium 

 B iron 

 C roughage 

 D vitamin D 


© UCLES 2017 0610/12/F/M/17 

13 The diagram shows a tooth with signs of decay. 

 enamel 

 decay 

 What has made the hole in the enamel of the tooth? 

 A acid 

 B saliva 

 C sugar 

 D toothpaste 


© UCLES 2017 0610/12/F/M/17 [Turn over 

14 Four leafy plant stems were placed into measuring cylinders with 100 cm^3 of water. A layer of oil prevented the water in the measuring cylinder from evaporating. 

 layer of oil 

 water 

 The plant stems were exposed to different air humidities and temperatures for 48 hours as shown in the table. 

 plant stem humidity^ 

 temperature / °C 

 final volume of water / cm^3 

 1 low 5 75 

 2 low 25 

 3 high 5 95 

 4 high 25 65 

 The final volume of water in the measuring cylinders is shown for plant stems 1, 3 and 4. 

 What would be a likely final volume for plant stem 2? 

 A less than 65 cm^3 

 B between 65 cm^3 and 75 cm^3 

 C between 75 cm^3 and 95 cm^3 

 D greater than 95 cm^3 


© UCLES 2017 0610/12/F/M/17 

15 Which blood vessel, if it becomes blocked, could lead directly to a heart attack? 

 A coronary artery 

 B pulmonary artery 

 C pulmonary vein 

 D vena cava 

16 A hospital patient who is feeling unwell is given a blood test. 

 The results of the blood test show a very low level of platelets. 

 What effect will this have? 

 A The blood will be unable to transport nutrients, hormones and carbon dioxide. 

 B The blood will not be able to carry as much oxygen to the tissues as normal. 

 C There will be a greater risk of bleeding because the blood will take longer to clot. 

 D There will be a greater risk of infection because the blood cannot make antibodies. 

17 What is a pathogen? 

 A a bacterium 

 B a disease-causing organism 

 C a disease that is transmissible 

 D a white blood cell that engulfs bacteria 


© UCLES 2017 0610/12/F/M/17 [Turn over 

18 The graph shows the rate and depth of a person’s breathing before exercise. 

 2.5 

 2.0 

 1.5 

 1.0 0 4 time / s 

 volume of air in the lungs during breathing / dm^3 

## 8 

 Which graph shows the rate and depth of breathing of the same person immediately after a period of exercise? 

 A B 

## C D 

## 2.5 

## 2.0 

## 1.5 

## 1.0 

## 0 4 

 time / s 

## 8 

## 2.5 

## 2.0 

## 1.5 

## 1.0 

## 0 4 

 time / s 

## 8 

## 2.5 

## 2.0 

## 1.5 

## 1.0 

## 0 4 

 time / s 

## 8 

## 2.5 

## 2.0 

## 1.5 

## 1.0 

## 0 4 

 time / s 

## 8 

 volume of air in the lungs during breathing / dm^3 

 volume of air in the lungs during breathing / dm^3 

 volume of air in the lungs during breathing / dm^3 

 volume of air in the lungs during breathing / dm^3 


© UCLES 2017 0610/12/F/M/17 

19 In an experiment, three glass bell jars were set up as shown in the diagram. 

 air from the lungs 

 green plant 

## P Q R 

 left in sunlight for 8 hours 

 left open to the air for 8 hours 

 air breathed out by a student for 5 minutes 

 bell jar 

 At the end of the experiment, which bell jar has the most oxygen and which has the least? 

 most oxygen least oxygen 

 A P Q 

 B P R 

 C Q P 

 D R P 

20 What are the products of anaerobic respiration in muscles? 

 A ethanol and carbon dioxide 

 B ethanol only 

 C lactic acid and carbon dioxide 

 D lactic acid only 

21 Which substance remains in the blood as it passes through the kidney? 

 A protein 

 B salts 

 C urea 

 D water 


© UCLES 2017 0610/12/F/M/17 [Turn over 

22 When the nervous system responds to a stimulus there are several stages to the response. 

 1 The central nervous system processes the information. 

 2 The receptors detect the stimulus. 

 3 A nerve impulse is sent to the central nervous system. 

 4 A response is produced. 

 5 A nerve impulse is sent to the muscles. 

 What is the correct order of the stages? 

 A 2, 3, 1, 5, 4 

 B 2, 3, 5, 1, 4 

 C 3, 2, 1, 5, 4 

 D 3, 2, 5, 1, 4 

23 In which parts of the body are there receptors for blood temperature? 

 brain fatty tissueof the skin 

## A ✓ ✓ 

## B ✓  

## C  ✓ 

## D   

24 Which row shows the effects of increased adrenaline release? 

 breathing rate pulse rate pupil 

 A decreases increases widens 

 B increases decreases widens 

 C increases increases narrows 

 D increases increases widens 

25 Which statement about the growth response of a plant shoot is correct? 

 A It grows away from gravity and away from light. 

 B It grows away from gravity and towards light. 

 C It grows towards gravity and away from light. 

 D It grows towards gravity and towards light. 


© UCLES 2017 0610/12/F/M/17 

26 A patient is suffering from an infection. Her doctor prescribes an antibiotic. 

 One week later the infection is still present. 

 What could be the reason for this? 

 A It was the correct antibiotic for this infection. 

 B The pathogen was a virus. 

 C The pathogen was resistant to the antibodies. 

 D The patient was resistant to the antibiotic. 

27 The diagram shows Hydra growing and releasing an offspring from the side of its body. 

 parent hydra 

 offspring 

 Which row is correct? 

 parent and offspring are genetically identical 

 uses sexual reproduction 

## A ✓ ✓ 

## B ✓  

## C  ✓ 

## D   


© UCLES 2017 0610/12/F/M/17 [Turn over 

28 The photograph shows the structures needed for reproduction in the flower of a dicotyledon. 

## P 

 What is the part labelled P? 

 A a stigma 

 B a style 

 C an anther 

 D an ovary 

29 What is the name of the organ in which a human fetus grows until it is born? 

 A bladder 

 B ovary 

 C urethra 

 D uterus 

30 What would protect against a sexually transmitted infection? 

 A contraceptive implant 

 B use of a condom 

 C use of a diaphragm 

 D vasectomy 


© UCLES 2017 0610/12/F/M/17 

31 Which term describes the transmission of genetic information from one generation to the next? 

 A genetic engineering 

 B inheritance 

 C natural selection 

 D variation 

32 What is a gene? 

 A a chain of amino acids that codes for a protein 

 B a length of DNA that codes for a protein 

 C a length of protein that codes for an allele 

 D a structure that codes for the production of DNA 

33 Which process involves meiosis? 

 A growth of cells 

 B production of gametes 

 C repair of damaged tissues 

 D replacement of cells 

34 The allele for brown coat colour is dominant to the allele for albino coat colour. 

 A homozygous brown-coated mammal is crossed with a heterozygous brown-coated mammal. 

 What percentage of the offspring will be albino? 

 A 0% B 25% C 50% D 100% 

35 Which description of an adaptive feature is correct? 

 A a change in phenotype that is caused by the environment 

 B a change in the environment that is an advantage to an organism 

 C an action by an organism that aids its ability to survive and reproduce 

 D an inherited feature that increases an organism’s ability to survive and reproduce 


© UCLES 2017 0610/12/F/M/17 [Turn over 

36 The diagram shows part of the carbon cycle. 

 carbon dioxide 

 plants 

 animals 

 dead matter 

## X 

 What does arrow X represent? 

 A decay 

 B nutrition 

 C photosynthesis 

 D respiration 

37 The diagram shows the water cycle. 

 pond 

## Y 

## Z 

 Which processes do Y and Z represent? 

## Y Z 

 A condensation evaporation 

 B precipitation evaporation 

 C transpiration condensation 

 D transpiration evaporation 


© UCLES 2017 0610/12/F/M/17 

38 What is inserted into a bacterium to make the bacterium produce insulin? 

 A a length of DNA from a human 

 B a length of DNA from another bacterium 

 C a molecule of insulin 

 D an enzyme 

39 The graph shows world wheat production from 1950 to 2000. 

 world wheat production 

## 1950 1975 2000 

 What has contributed to the changes shown in wheat production? 

 A not using herbicides 

 B not using insecticides 

 C using selective breeding 

 D using smaller areas of land 


© UCLES 2017 0610/12/F/M/17 

40 Which graph shows the effect of pollution by untreated sewage on the amount of oxygen dissolved in a river? 

 B 

 dissolved oxygen 

## C 

 distance downstream sewage enters the river 

 dissolved oxygen 

 distance downstream sewage enters the river 

 dissolved oxygen 

## D 

 distance downstream sewage enters the river 

## A 

 dissolved oxygen 

 distance downstream sewage enters the river 


© UCLES 2017 0610/12/F/M/17 

## BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2017 0610/12/F/M/17 

## BLANK PAGE 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2017 0610/12/F/M/17 

## BLANK PAGE 


