 This document has 16 pages. Blank pages are indicated. 

 IB20 03_0610_12/6RP 

© UCLES 2020 (^) **[Turn over** 

## *2471671446* 

# Cambridge IGCSE 

## ™ 

### BIOLOGY 0610/12 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) February/March 2020 45 minutes 

 You must answer on the multiple choice answer sheet. 

 You will need: Multiple choice answer sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 INSTRUCTIONS 

- There are **forty** questions on this paper. Answer **all** questions. 

- For each question there are four possible answers **A** , **B** , **C** and **D**. Choose the **one** you consider correct     and record your choice in soft pencil on the multiple choice answer sheet. 

- Follow the instructions on the multiple choice answer sheet. 

- Write in soft pencil. 

- Write your name, centre number and candidate number on the multiple choice answer sheet in the     spaces provided unless this has been done for you. 

- Do **not** use correction fluid. 

- Do **not** write on any bar codes. 

- You may use a calculator. 

 INFORMATION 

- The total mark for this paper is 40. 

- Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. 

- Any rough working should be done on this question paper. 


© UCLES 2020 0610/12/F/M/20 

**1** Which characteristic do **all** living organisms show? 

 A breathing 

 B excretion 

 C photosynthesis 

 D tropism 

**2** Using the binomial naming system, the Arctic fox is called _Vulpes lagopus_. 

 Which row is correct? 

 Vulpes lagopus 

 A genus kingdom 

 B genus species 

 C species genus 

 D species kingdom 

**3** What is a characteristic of both insects and arachnids? 

 A eight legs 

 B exoskeleton 

 C three pairs of legs 

 D wings 

**4** What structures can be found in both plant and animal cells? 

 A cell walls and cell membranes 

 B nuclei and cell walls 

 C cytoplasm and chloroplasts 

 D cell membranes and nuclei 


© UCLES 2020 0610/12/F/M/20 **[Turn over** 

**5** The diagram shows a sample of material taken from an organism. 

 Which level of organisation does the sample show? 

 A cell 

 B organ 

 C organ system 

 D tissue 

**6** What is the function of a root hair cell? 

 A absorption 

 B photosynthesis 

 C reproduction 

 D support 

**7** Which row describes osmosis? 

 movement of water 

 energy from respiration used 

 movement through a partially permeable membrane 

 A    key 

 B    = yes 

 C    = no 

 D    

**8** A student made the following statements about the movement of ions by active transport. 

 1 It is the net movement of particles from a low concentration to a high concentration. 

 2 It is the net movement of particles from a high concentration to a low concentration. 

 3 It requires the use of energy from respiration. 

 4 It can only take place in living cells. 

 Which statements are correct? 

 A 1, 3 and 4 B 1 and 4 only C 2 and 4 only D 2 only 


© UCLES 2020 0610/12/F/M/20 

**9** A test was performed on a food substance. A positive result was shown by a colour change to blue-black. 

 What solution was used for the test? 

 A biuret solution 

 B DCPIP solution 

 C iodine solution 

 D Benedict’s solution 

**10** The diagram shows an experiment on the digestion of the protein in egg albumen by protease. 

 The protease was taken from a human stomach. 

 In which test-tube will the protein be digested most quickly? 

 A B C D 

 egg albumen + protease 

 egg albumen + dilute hydrochloric acid 

 egg albumen + dilute hydrochloric acid + protease 

 egg albumen + dilute hydrochloric acid + boiled protease 

 water-bath at 37 °C 

**11** What is left at the end of an enzyme-controlled reaction? 

 A enzymes and products 

 B enzymes and substrates 

 C enzymes only 

 D products only 


© UCLES 2020 0610/12/F/M/20 **[Turn over** 

**12** A student drew a diagram to show the substances used and produced in photosynthesis in a leaf. 

 1 + 2 are used by the leaf 

 3 + 4 are produced by the leaf 

 Which row shows the correct labels for the diagram? 

### 1 2 3 4 

 A carbon dioxide glucose oxygen water 

 B water carbon dioxide glucose oxygen 

 C oxygen water carbon dioxide glucose 

 D glucose oxygen water carbon dioxide 

**13** The diagram shows a type of plant cell. 

 cytoplasm 

 nucleus 

 vacuole 

 chloroplast 

 In which tissue is this cell found? 

 A leaf epidermis 

 B palisade mesophyll 

 C root epidermis 

 D xylem 

**14** The list shows some human health problems. 

 1 chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 

 2 constipation 

 3 coronary heart disease 

 4 obesity 

 Which problems can be caused by malnutrition? 

 A 1, 2 and 3 B 1 and 3 only C 2, 3 and 4 D 2 and 4 only 


© UCLES 2020 0610/12/F/M/20 

**15** The table shows the percentage of students from two schools who have one or more decayed teeth. 

 percentage of students with decayed teeth 

 school X 30 

 school Y 60 

 What might explain these results? 

 A There is less calcium in the students’ diet at school X than at school Y. 

 B There is less sugar in the students’ diet at school X than at school Y. 

 C There is less vitamin C in the students’ diet at school X than at school Y. 

 D There is less vitamin D in the students’ diet at school X than at school Y. 

**16** Digested proteins are absorbed into the blood as 

 A amino acids. 

 B fatty acids. 

 C glucose. 

 D glycerol. 

**17** When stems with white flowers are cut and placed in a blue stain the petals turn blue. 

 Which tissue in the stem does the stain travel through to reach the petals? 

 A epidermis 

 B mesophyll 

 C phloem 

 D xylem 

**18** Which process releases water vapour into the atmosphere from the leaves of trees? 

 A active transport 

 B osmosis 

 C respiration 

 D transpiration 


© UCLES 2020 0610/12/F/M/20 **[Turn over** 

**19** Which person is most at risk from developing coronary heart disease? 

 age gender activity level other information 

 A 23 female professional athlete 

 non-smoker 

 B 40 male plays sport at weekends non-smoker 

 C 19 female plays sport twice a week 

 smokes 5 cigarettes a day 

 D 65 male does no exercise^ smokes 20 cigarettes a day 

**20** The diagram shows a section through a blood vessel. 

### P 

### Q 

 Which type of blood vessel is shown, and in which direction does the blood flow? 

 type of vessel 

 direction of flow 

 A artery P to Q 

 B artery Q to P 

 C vein P to Q 

 D vein Q to P 

**21** Which disease is transmissible? 

 A cholera 

 B chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 

 C lung cancer 

 D scurvy 


© UCLES 2020 0610/12/F/M/20 

**22** The diagram shows an alveolus. The arrows represent the movement of gases. 

 1 

(^32) Which row is correct? 

### 1 2 3 

 A oxygen carbon dioxide air 

 B air carbon dioxide oxygen 

 C air oxygen carbon dioxide 

 D carbon dioxide oxygen air 

**23** Four flasks are sterilised and are set up as shown. 

 Which flask will contain the most alcohol after several hours? 

 yeast and water 

 at 4 °C 

 yeast and water 

 at 20 °C 

 yeast, water and sugar 

 at 4 °C 

 yeast, water and sugar 

 at 20 °C 

### A B C D 

 cotton wool 


© UCLES 2020 0610/12/F/M/20 **[Turn over** 

**24** In the diagram, which letter identifies the urethra? 

### A 

### B 

### C 

### D 

**25** Some organs are listed. 

 1 adrenal 

 2 pancreas 

 3 ovary 

 4 salivary 

 Which are endocrine glands? 

 A 1, 2 and 3 B 1, 2 and 4 C 1, 3 and 4 D 2 and 3 only 

**26** The table shows some of the responses that occur in humans when body temperature changes. 

 Which row shows the responses that occur when the body temperature increases above normal? 

 hair lies flat shivering sweating 

 A    key 

 B     = yes 

 C     = no 

 D    

**27** What is an example of phototropism? 

 A a chemical messenger produced by a plant 

 B a painful sensation in response to a stimulus 

 C the growth of a plant root towards the centre of the Earth 

 D the growth of a plant shoot towards light 


© UCLES 2020 0610/12/F/M/20 

**28** The oxygen carrying capacity of the blood of smokers is less than that of non-smokers. 

 Which component of tobacco smoke causes this? 

 A carbon monoxide 

 B nicotine 

 C smoke particles 

 D tar 

**29** Which statement about asexual reproduction is correct? 

 A Asexual reproduction produces genetically identical offspring from one parent. 

 B Asexual reproduction produces genetically identical offspring from two parents. 

 C Asexual reproduction produces genetically different offspring from one parent. 

 D Asexual reproduction produces genetically different offspring from two parents. 

**30** Which environmental factor is **not** always a requirement for seed germination? 

 A light 

 B oxygen 

 C suitable temperature 

 D water 

**31** The diagram shows the female reproductive system. 

 Where are gametes produced? 

### D 

### A 

### B 

### C 


© UCLES 2020 0610/12/F/M/20 **[Turn over** 

**32** Some features of cell division are listed. 

 1 involved in making gametes 

 2 involved in replacing cells 

 3 makes genetically different cells 

 4 makes genetically identical cells 

 Which features are involved in meiosis? 

 A 1 and 3 B 1 and 4 C 2 and 3 D 2 and 4 

**33** Which cross will be pure-breeding? 

 A a female homozygous individual and a male heterozygous individual bred together 

 B a male homozygous individual and a female heterozygous individual bred together 

 C two identical heterozygous individuals bred together 

 D two identical homozygous individuals bred together 

**34** What applies to selective breeding but **not** to natural selection? 

 A Humans select individuals with desirable features. 

 B Individuals may produce a large number of offspring. 

 C Individuals pass their alleles to the next generation. 

 D There is variation among the offspring produced. 

**35** What is the principal source of energy for living organisms? 

 A herbivores 

 B plants 

 C photosynthesis 

 D the Sun 


© UCLES 2020 0610/12/F/M/20 

**36** The diagram shows a pyramid of numbers. 

 level 

 3 

 2 

 1 

 Which type of organism is found at level 1? 

 A carnivore 

 B decomposer 

 C herbivore 

 D producer 

**37** The diagram shows part of the carbon cycle. 

 carbon dioxide in the air 

 carbohydrates in living plants 

 dead matter 

 carbohydrates in living animals 

### Y 

 Which process occurs at Y? 

 A combustion 

 B decay 

 C photosynthesis 

 D respiration 


© UCLES 2020 0610/12/F/M/20 **[Turn over** 

**38** Chopped apple is placed into filter paper and a funnel as shown in the diagram. 

 Enzymes are added to increase the volume of apple juice released. 

 filter funnel filter paper 

 beaker 

 apple juice 

 chopped apple 

 Which enzyme would release the highest volume of juice? 

 A amylase 

 B lipase 

 C pectinase 

 D protease 

**39** Which effect is **most** likely to occur as a result of deforestation? 

 A an increase in the number of species 

 B an increase in soil erosion 

 C a decrease in the level of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere 

 D a decreased risk of flooding 


© UCLES 2020 0610/12/F/M/20 

**40** The diagram shows the positions of four farms and the concentrations of nitrate at different points in a river. 

 Which farm is likely to have been using too much fertiliser on its land? 

 farm A 

 farm B 

 farm D 

 farm C 

### 60 

### 40 

### 20 

### 0 

 nitrate concentration / ppm 

 direction of flow 

 direction of flow 


© UCLES 2020 0610/12/F/M/20 

### BLANK PAGE 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2020 0610/12/F/M/20 

### BLANK PAGE 


