® IGCSE is a registered trademark. 

 This document consists of 7 printed pages. 

© UCLES 2017 **[Turn over** 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

**ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/12** 

Paper 12 **March 2017** 

MARK SCHEME 

Maximum Mark: 80 

 Published 

This mark scheme is published as an aid to teachers and candidates, to indicate the requirements of the examination. It shows the basis on which Examiners were instructed to award marks. It does not indicate the details of the discussions that took place at an Examiners’ meeting before marking began, which would have considered the acceptability of alternative answers. 

Mark schemes should be read in conjunction with the question paper and the Principal Examiner Report for Teachers. 

Cambridge will not enter into discussions about these mark schemes. 

Cambridge is publishing the mark schemes for the March 2017 series for most Cambridge IGCSE®, Cambridge International A and AS Level components and some Cambridge O Level components. 


##### PUBLISHED 

##### MARK SCHEME NOTES 

 The following notes are intended to aid interpretation of mark schemes in general, but individual mark schemes may include marks awarded for specific reasons outside the scope of these notes. 

 Types of mark 

 M Method marks, awarded for a valid method applied to the problem. 

 A Accuracy mark, awarded for a correct answer or intermediate step correctly obtained. For accuracy marks to be given, the associated Method mark must be earned or implied. 

 B Mark for a correct result or statement independent of Method marks. 

 When a part of a question has two or more ‘method’ steps, the M marks are in principle independent unless the scheme specifically says otherwise; and similarly where there are several B marks allocated. The notation ‘ dep ’ is used to indicate that a particular M or B mark is dependent on an earlier mark in the scheme. 

 Abbreviations 

 awrt answers which round to cao correct answer only dep dependent FT follow through after error isw ignore subsequent working nfww not from wrong working oe or equivalent rot rounded or truncated SC Special Case soi seen or implied www without wrong working 

 Question Answer Marks Part Marks 

**1 (a) (i)** 0 **B1** 

 (ii) 10 B1 

 (b) B1 

 B1 

 B1 

 either X ∩ Y = Y or X ∩ Z = Z 

 Y ∩ Z = ∅ 

 completely correct Venn diagram. 

_Y_ (^) _Z_ 

##### X 


##### PUBLISHED 

 Question Answer Marks Part Marks 

**2 (i)** 

 B1 

 B1 

##### B1 

 2 complete cycles 

 having a maximum at y = 4 and a minimum at y = − 2 completely correct curve 

**(ii)** (^) ( 90 ,o^ −^2 ) **B1** (^3) 5 4 3 2 5 10 4 4 

##### + ^ ^ + ^  

#####     

#####     

 x x a a a 

 a^5^ = 32 , so a = 2 

## ( ) 

##### 5 1 4 

##### 4 

 b = × × their a , 

 leading to b = 20 

## ( ) 

##### 1 3 

##### 10 

##### 16 

 c = × × their a 

 leading to c = 5 

##### B1 

##### M1 

##### A1 

##### M1 

##### A1 

 correct attempt to obtain b 

**4 (a) (i)** 

##### 1 4 3 

##### 10 2 1 

#####   

 (^) −    

##### B1 

##### B1 

 for 

##### 1 

 determinant for matrix 

 (ii) 

##### 1 4 3 1 5 

##### 10 2 1 4 2 

#####   −^ −  

= (^)     −   

##### M 

##### 1 4 7 

##### 5 3 6 

#####  −  

= (^)     **M** oe 

##### M1 

##### A2,1,0 

 pre-multiplication by the matrix from part (i) 

 –1 each element error 

### (b) − 3 a + 2 = 4 6( a − 4 ) 

##### 2 

##### 3 

 a = 

##### M1 

##### A1 

 correct use of a determinant 


##### PUBLISHED 

 Question Answer Marks Part Marks 

**5 (i)** LHS 

##### 1 

 sin sin 

#### θ 

#### θ 

##### = − 

 1 sin^2 sin 

#### θ 

#### θ 

##### − 

##### = 

 cos^2 sin 

#### θ 

#### θ 

##### = 

 = cot θ cosθ 

##### M1 

##### M1 

##### A1 

 dealing with cosec θ and attempt at dealing with fractions correct use of identity 

 completely correct proof 

 (ii) 

##### 1 

 cot cos cos 3 

#### θ θ= θ 

 3cot θ cos θ − cos θ= 0 

### cos θ ( 3cot θ − 1 ) = 0 

 cos θ = 0 

##### 1 

 cot 3 

#### θ = , so tan θ = 3 

 π 3 π , 2 2 

#### θ = , θ =1.25, 4.39 

##### M1 

##### M1 

##### A1,A1 

 use of part (i), manipulation and factorisation dealing with cot θ and attempt to solve 

 A1 for each pair of solutions (allow 1.57 and 4.71) 

**6 (a) (i)** 40 320 **B1** 

 (ii) 720 B1 

 (iii) 5040 B1 

 (b) (i) 35 B1 

 (ii) 1 B1 

**(iii)** (^) Twins in team of 4 5 _C_ 2 = 10 Twins in team of 3 = 5 Total = 15 www 

##### B1 

##### B1 

##### B1 


##### PUBLISHED 

 Question Answer Marks Part Marks 

**7 (a)** 

##### 102 8 

##### 17 15 

#####   

 (^) −    

##### 48 

##### 90 

#####   

 (^) −    

##### M1 

##### A1 

 attempt to obtain magnitude of 8 15 

#####   

 (^) −    and use it **(b)** 

##### 2 2 4 2 

(^10 2 3 27) 

#####  −^ +  ^  

#####  =^ ^  

 +^ +  (^)   _p q_ (^) _p p q_ 2 _p_ − 2 _q_ + 4 = _p_^2 10 _p_ + 2 _q_ + 3 = 27 leading to _p_^2^ − 12 _p_ + 20 = 0 _p_ = 2, _q_ = 2 _p_ = 10, _q_ = − 38 

##### M1 

##### M1 

##### A1 

##### M1 

##### A1 

##### A1 

 dealing with the scalar and with addition 

 equating like vectors and simplifying both equations correct 

 elimination of q and subsequent solution of quadratic 

**8 (i)** 

## ( ) 

 d 2cos 2 d 

##### = − + 

 y x c x 

 5 = −2 cos π+ c d 3 2cos 2 d 

##### = − 

 y x x 

##### M1 

##### A1 

##### M1 

##### A1 

 integration to obtain the form a cos 2 x correct, condone omission of c 

 attempt to find c 

 May be implied by a correct c 

### (ii) y = 3 x − sin 2 x ( + c ) 

 1 π 1 2 4 2 

 − = − + c 

 π 3 sin 2 4 

 y = x − x − oe 

##### M1 

##### A1 

##### M1 

##### A1 

 integration to obtain the form a sin 2 x correct, condone omission of c 

 attempt to find c 

 (iii) When 

 π 12 

 x = , 

 d 3 3 d 

##### = − 

 y x 

 Normal equation: 1 1 π 2 3 3 12 

##### + = ^ −  

#####   

##### −   

 y x 

 y = − 0.789 x −0.294cao 

##### M1 

##### A1FT 

##### A1 

 attempt to obtain perpendicular gradient and normal equation 

 FT on their 

 d d 

 y x 

 from (i). Allow 

 unsimplified 


##### PUBLISHED 

 Question Answer Marks Part Marks 

**9 (i)**^2 

##### 1 

 10 20 π 2 

#### × × θ= 

 2 π 5 

#### θ = 

##### M1 

##### A1 

 use of sector area to obtain θ 

 (ii) Arc length AB = 4 π 

### BC^2 = 102 + 10 2 − ( 2 × 10 × 10 ×cos 2 θ) 

 or 10 sin 4 π^ sinπ 5 10 

##### BC = 

##### BC = 19.02 

 Perimeter = 50.6 

##### B1FT 

##### M1 

##### A1 

##### A1 

 FT their θ 

 valid attempt to obtain BC 

 (iii) Area = Either 2 

 2 

 1 π 19.02 sin 2 5 1 2 π 20 π 10 sin 2 5 

 (^) ×     (^)   + (^)  − (^)  ×   ^  = 121.6 allow awrt 122 Or 1 4 π 20 π 2 10 10sin 2 5 

##### + ^ × ×  

#####   

#####   

 = 121.6 allow awrt 122 

##### M1 

##### M1 

##### A1 

##### M1,M1 

##### A1 

 area of triangle ACB 

 area of relevant segment 

 M1 for area of triangle AOB or AOC M1 for a complete method 


##### PUBLISHED 

 Question Answer Marks Part Marks 

(^10) ( ) 3 2 _x_ − 5 2 = 3 3 _x_ = 4 At _A_ (^) _x_ =2.5 Either Area (^) ( ) 4 3 2 2.5 

##### 1 3 

 3 3 2 5 d 2 2 

= × × − (^) ∫ _x_ − _x_ 

### ( ) 

 4 2.5 2.5 

##### 9 3 1 

##### 2 5 

##### 4 5 

 = − ^ x −    

### ( ) 

(^9 3 1 3) 2.5 0 4 5 

##### = − ^ −  

#####   

#####   

##### 9 3 

##### 20 

##### = 

 Or line AB : y = 2 3 x − 5 3 

Area (^) ( ) 4 3 2 = (^) ∫2.5 2 3 _x_ − 5 3 − 2 _x_ − 5 d _x_ 

### ( ) 

 5 4 2 2 

 2.5 

##### 2 5 

##### 3 5 3 

##### 5 

#####   

#####  −  

= (^)  − −    _x x x_ 

##### 9 3 9 3 

##### 4 5 

##### = − 

##### 9 3 

##### 20 

##### = 

##### M1 

##### A1 

##### B1 

##### M1 

##### M1 

##### A1 

##### DM1 

##### A1 

##### M1 

##### M1 

##### A1 

##### DM1 

##### A1 

 attempt to find x -coordinate of B x -coordinate of B x -coordinate of A 

 plan and attempt to find the area of the triangle. Allow unsimplified 

 attempt at integration, must be in the form 

### ( ) 

 2 x − 5 2.5 correct integration 

 attempt to use limits correctly 

 equation of AB and attempt to integrate 

 attempt at integration, must contain the 

### form ( ) 

 2.5 2 x − 5 

 correct integration 

 attempt to use correct limits correctly 

**11 (i)** ln _y_ = ln _A_ + _bx_ 

 0.7 = ln A + b 3.7 = ln A +2.5 b 

 leading to b = 2 and ln A = −1.3, so A =0.273or e−1.3 

##### B1 

##### M1 

##### A1 

##### A1 

##### M1,A1 

 may be implied by later work use of either point correctly in above equation or equivalent 

 one correct equation 

 M1 for dealing with ln correctly to obtain A. 

#### (ii) ln^ y^ =^ −1.3^ +^2 x 

#### ln y =2.7 

#### y = 14.9 

##### M1 

##### A1 

 valid attempt to find y. Must include correct substitution and dealing with ln correctly. 


