 This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. 

 DC (LK/SG) 129475/3 © UCLES 2017 [Turn over 

* 4 2 1 4 7 6 7 2 5 9 * 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/22 Paper 2 February/March 2017 2 hours Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all the questions. Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 


© UCLES 2017 0606/22/F/M/17 

 Mathematical Formulae 

### 1. ALGEBRA 

 Quadratic Equation 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

 x 

 b b ac a 

 = 

 − 2 − 4 2 

 Binomial Theorem 

( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( _n_ 

# 1 ) a 

_n_ –1 (^) _b_ + 

# ( 

 n 

# 2 ) a 

_n_ –2 (^) _b_ (^2) + … + 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) a 

_n_ – _r_ (^) _br_ (^) + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( _n_ 

# r )^ =^ 

 n! ( n – r )! r! 

### 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

 Identities 

 sin^2 A + cos^2 A = 1 

 sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A 

 cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

 Formulae for ∆ ABC a sin A =^ 

 b sin B =^ 

 c sin C 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

 ∆ = 

### 1 

 2 bc^ sin^ A 


© UCLES 2017 0606/22/F/M/17 **[Turn over** 

**1** Solve the equation 5 3 _x_ = 10. [3] 

**2** The value, _V_ dollars, of a car aged _t_ years is given by _V_ = 12000 e-0 2^.^ _t_. 

 (i) Write down the value of the car when it was new. [1] 

 (ii) Find the time it takes for the value to decrease to 32 of the value when it was new. [2] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/22/F/M/17 

**3** The polynomial p ( ) _x_ is _x_^4 2 _x_^3 3 _x_^2 + 8 _x_ 4. 

 (i) Show that p ( ) x can be written as ( x 1 ) ( x^3 x^2 4 x + 4 ). [1] 

 (ii) Hence write p ( ) x as a product of its linear factors, showing all your working. [4] 

**4** Find the set of values of _k_ for which the line _y_ = 3 _x_ + _k_ and the curve _y_ = 2 _x_^2 3 _x_ + 4 do not intersect. [4] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/22/F/M/17 **[Turn over** 

### 5 

 x 

### 3 + 5 20 

 The diagram shows a trapezium made from a rectangle and a right-angled triangle. The dimensions, in centimetres, of the rectangle and triangle are shown. The area, in square centimetres, of the trapezium is 13 + 5 5. Without using a calculator , find the value of x in the form p + q 5 , where p and q are integers. [5] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/22/F/M/17 

**6 (a) (i)** Express 8 _x_^9 _x_ -^3 ` 3 j` 6 j in the form _axb_^ , where _a_ and _b_ are constants to be found. [2] 

 (ii) Hence solve the equation 8 x^9 x -^3 =6250  3 j 6 j 

. [2] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/22/F/M/17 **[Turn over** 

**(b)** It is given that _y_ = log (^) _a_ ( _ax_ ) + 2 log _a_ ( 4 _x_ 3 ) 1 , where _a_ is a positive integer. **(i)** Explain why _x_ must be greater than 0.75. [1] **(ii)** Show that _y_ can be written as log (^) _a_ ( 16 _x_^3 24 _x_^2 + 9 _x_ ). [3] **(iii)** Find the value of _x_ for which _y_ = log _a_ ( 9 _x_ ). [2] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/22/F/M/17 

**7 (a)** Calculate the magnitude and bearing of the resultant velocity of 10 ms-^1 on a bearing of 240° and 5 ms-^1 due south. [5] 

 (b) A car travelling east along a road at a velocity of 38 kmh-^1 passes a lorry travelling west on the same road at a velocity of 56 kmh-^1. Write down the velocity of the lorry relative to the car. [2] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/22/F/M/17 **[Turn over** 

**8** The points _A_ (3, 7) and _B_ (8, 4) lie on the line _L_. The line through the point _C_ (6, −4) with gradient 61 meets the line _L_ at the point _D_. Calculate 

 (i) the coordinates of D , [6] 

 (ii) the equation of the line through D perpendicular to the line 3 y 2 x = 10. [2] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/22/F/M/17 

## 9 (a) Find y e 2 x^ +^1 d x. [2] 

**(b) (i)** Given that _y_ = (^) ln _xx_ , find (^) d d _x y_ 

. [3] 

 (ii) Hence find 

ln (^) ( ln ) d _x_ (^) _x x_ (^1 1) _x_ 

### 1 

### 2 + 2 

### J 

### L 

### KK 

### N 

### P 

## y OO. [3] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/22/F/M/17 **[Turn over** 

**10** Solve, for 0 ° G _x_ G 360 °, the equation 

 (i) cot ( 2 x 10 ° )= 43 , [4] 

 (ii) sin 2 x cos 2 x = cos x. [5] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/22/F/M/17 

**11** The functions f and g are defined by 

 f ( ) x x^ x^2 for x 2 

 2 = -^ H , 

 g ( ) x x^ 2 1 for x 0 

 2 = -^ H. 

 (i) State the range of g. [1] 

 (ii) Explain why fg(1) does not exist. [2] 

 (iii) Show that gf ( ) x ax b x 

 2 c = + + 2 , where a , b and c are constants to be found. [3] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/22/F/M/17 **[Turn over** 

 (iv) State the domain of gf. [1] 

 (v) Show that f 1 ( ) x x^ 2 x^8 

 2 

(^) = +^ +. [4] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/22/F/M/17 

**12** The diagram shows a shape made by cutting an equilateral triangle out of a rectangle of width _x_ cm. 

 x cm 

 The perimeter of the shape is 20 cm. 

 (i) Show that the area, A cm^2 , of the shape is given by 

 A 10 x x 4 

(^6 3 2) = 

### J + 

### L 

### KK 

### N 

### P 

### OO. [3] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/22/F/M/17 

 (ii) Given that x can vary, find the value of x which produces the maximum area and calculate this maximum area. Give your answers to 2 significant figures. [4] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/22/F/M/17 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

### BLANK PAGE 


