 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 16 printed pages. 

 IB18 11_0625_22/3RP © UCLES 2018 [Turn over 

## *3081874355* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

### PHYSICS 0625/22 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) October/November 2018 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. Take the weight of 1.0 kg to be 10 N (acceleration of free fall = 10 m / s 2 ). 


© UCLES 2018 0625/22/O/N/18 

**1** The diagram shows part of a micrometer screw gauge. 

### 0 

 mm 

### 1 2 

 45 40 

 35 

 30 

 What is the smallest reading that can be achieved using this micrometer screw gauge? 

 A 0.0001 mm B 0.01 mm C 0.1 mm D 1 mm 

**2** The speed-time graph shows the motion of a car. 

 At which time is its acceleration greatest? 

 speed 

 0^ A^ B^ C^ D time 

### 0 

**3** An athlete runs at a speed of 8 m / s for 10 s, and then at a speed of 6 m / s for 12 s. 

 Which calculation gives the average speed of the athlete in m / s? 

### A 

### 2 

### 8 + 6 

### B 

### 22 

### (8 ×10)+(6×12) 

### C 

### 22 

### (8 ÷10)+(6÷12) 

### D 

### 22 

### (10 ÷8)+(12÷6) 


© UCLES 2018 0625/22/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**4** A helium balloon is tied to a top-pan balance. A metal block of mass 100 g is placed on the balance. The reading on the balance is 91 g. 

(^91) g metal block helium balloon Which statement can be deduced from this experiment? **A** The balloon exerts a downward force of 0.09 N on the top-pan balance. **B** The helium has a mass of –9 g. **C** The helium has a mass of +9 g. **D** The resultant downward force on the top-pan balance is 0.91 N. **5** The diagram shows four blocks of different metals. Each block has a mass of 12 g. Which metal has the largest density? 2 cm 1 cm 1 cm 3 cm 1 cm 1 cm 2 cm 2 cm 1 cm 3 cm 2 cm 1 cm 

### A B 

### C D 


© UCLES 2018 0625/22/O/N/18 

**6** The graph shows how the length of a spring changes when the stretching force is increased. 

 30 

### 25 

### 20 

### 15 

### 10 

### 5 

### 0 

### 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 

 length of spring / cm 

 force / N 

 In the Hooke’s law region, what is the spring constant for this spring? 

 A 0.20 N / cm B 0.22 N / cm C 0.28 N / cm D 0.33 N / cm 

**7** Point X is the centre of mass of a lamina in the shape of a triangle with sides of equal length. The top of the triangle is cut off along the dotted line shown. 

### X 

 What happens to the centre of mass, X? 

 A moves towards the bottom of the page 

 B moves to the left 

 C moves to the right 

 D moves towards the top of the page 


© UCLES 2018 0625/22/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**8** An object of mass 3.0 kg, travelling at a speed of 6.0 m / s, collides with an object of mass 2.0 kg, travelling in the opposite direction at a speed of 2.0 m / s. 

 3.0 kg 

 6.0 m / s 

 2.0 kg 

 2.0 m / s 

 The objects stick together during the collision. 

 What is the speed and direction of the combined mass after the collision? 

 A 4.4 m / s to the left 

 B 4.4 m / s to the right 

 C 2.8 m / s to the left 

 D 2.8 m / s to the right 

**9** Which device is designed to convert chemical energy into kinetic energy? 

 A an a.c. generator 

 B a battery-powered torch 

 C a car engine 

 D a wind-up mechanical clock 

**10** The diagram shows a pendulum. 

### P 

### R 

### Q 

 10 cm 

 The pendulum swings from P to Q to R and back to P. 

 P is 10 cm higher than Q. 

 At which speed does the pendulum bob pass through Q? 

 A 0.44 m / s B 1.0 m / s C 1.4 m / s D 2.0 m / s 


© UCLES 2018 0625/22/O/N/18 

**11** A crane on a building site lifts bricks of total mass 200 kg, initially at rest on the ground, with uniform acceleration. 

 When the bricks are 5.0 m from the ground, they have a speed of 5.0 m / s. 

 How much work is done during this process? 

 A 2.5 kJ B 10.0 kJ C 12.5 kJ D 35 kJ 

**12** A manometer is used to measure the pressure of a gas supply. 

 h 

 connection to gas supply 

 manometer 

 liquid 

 Which change gives a greater value of height h? 

 A using a less dense liquid 

 B using a more dense liquid 

 C using a narrower tube 

 D using a wider tube 

**13** A washbasin has an exit pipe covered with a plug of area 12 cm^2. A chain is attached to the centre of the plug to assist in pulling the plug away from the exit hole. The washbasin contains water to a depth of 0.080 m. 

 The density of the water is 1000 kg / m^3. 

 chain 

 plug 

 What is the force acting on the plug due to the water? 

 A 0.96 N B 800 N C 9600 N D 80 000 N 


© UCLES 2018 0625/22/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**14** Diagram 1 shows apparatus being used to observe smoke particles. 

 Diagram 2 shows how a smoke particle moves randomly. 

 microscope 

 air molecules and smoke particles 

 light 

 diagram 1 diagram 2 

 random movement 

 eye 

 Why do the smoke particles move randomly? 

 A They are hit by air molecules. 

 B They are less dense than air. 

 C They are moved by convection currents. 

 D They gain energy from the light. 

**15** A closed container of gas is heated. The pressure of the gas increases. 

 Which statement explains this increase in pressure? 

 A The changes in the momentum of the gas molecules striking the walls of the container increase. 

 B The forces of attraction between the gas molecules and the walls of the container increase. 

 C The gas molecules collide with each other more frequently. 

 D The gas molecules lose more energy when they strike the walls of the container. 


© UCLES 2018 0625/22/O/N/18 

**16** The metal lid on a glass jar is difficult to unscrew. 

 The jar is placed in a warm oven until the jar and the lid reach the same temperature. The lid is now easily unscrewed. 

 Which property accounts for this? 

 A thermal capacity of the jar 

 B thermal capacity of the lid 

 C thermal conduction 

 D thermal expansion 

**17** A block of iron of mass _M_ is heated and gains 10 kJ of internal energy. The temperature of the 

## block rises by θ °C. 

 A second block of iron of mass 2 M is heated and gains 5.0 kJ of internal energy. 

 What is the temperature rise of the second block in °C? 

### A 

### 4 

θ (^) **B** 2 θ (^) **C** 2 θ **D** 4 θ **18** Which factors affect the sensitivity of a thermometer? 1 the diameter of the bore of the tube 2 the length of the capillary tube 3 the thickness of the bulb wall **A** 1 only **B** 1 and 2 only **C** 1 and 3 only **D** 1, 2 and 3 **19** Which statement about convection is **not** correct? **A** It enables water in a pan on a cooker to get evenly heated. **B** It happens in liquids and gases. **C** It means that heat rises. **D** It occurs because the density of a fluid decreases when it is heated. 


© UCLES 2018 0625/22/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**20** A lamp has a metal filament that glows when heated by an electric current. 

 The middle of the filament is at a very high temperature. The ends of the filament, which are connected to the base of the lamp, are cooler. 

 Which statement is correct? 

 A Some thermal energy is conducted to the base of the lamp. 

 B The filament radiates energy equally at all points along its length. 

 C The lamp transfers all of the electrical energy it receives into light energy. 

 D When the voltage across the filament is halved, the power output is halved. 

**21** Plane water waves travel from a shallow region into a deeper region. They travel more quickly in the deeper water. 

 wave direction 

 shallow water 

 deep water 

 boundary 

 Which diagram shows the wave pattern in the deeper water? 

 A B C D 

**22** A thin converging lens has a focal length of 6.0 cm. An observer looks through the lens at an object which is placed 4.0 cm from the lens. 

 4.0 cm 

 object 

 eye 

 Which description of the image that is observed is correct? 

 A diminished and inverted 

 B diminished and virtual 

 C enlarged and inverted 

 D enlarged and virtual 


© UCLES 2018 0625/22/O/N/18 

**23** A transmitter produces radio waves of wavelength 1500 m. It takes the waves 0.025 s to travel from the transmitter to a radio receiver. 

 What is the distance between the radio transmitter and the receiver? 

 A 5.0 × 10 3 m B 2.0 × 10 5 m C 7.5 × 10 6 m D 1.1 × 10 10 m 

**24** Different parts of the electromagnetic spectrum are used for different purposes. Below are four statements about parts of the spectrum. 

 statement 1: Infra-red waves are used in television remote controllers. 

 statement 2: Radio waves are used to transmit television pictures from satellites to Earth. 

 statement 3: Ultraviolet waves are used for intruder alarms. 

 statement 4: X-rays are used for security checks. 

 Which statements are correct? 

 A 1 and 2 B 1 and 4 C 2 and 3 D 3 and 4 

**25** A sheet of ice floats on water. A source of sound S is positioned at the edge of the ice sheet. 

 Four microphones are placed equal distances from S. 

 Which microphone detects the sound from S first? 

### S 

### A 

### C 

### D 

### B 

 ice 

 air 

 water 


© UCLES 2018 0625/22/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**26** The diagram shows a bar magnet at rest on a smooth horizontal surface. A length of soft-iron wire is held parallel to the magnet. 

### N 

### S 

 soft-iron wire magnet 

 The wire is released. 

 What happens? 

 A The wire moves away from the magnet. 

 B The wire moves towards the magnet. 

 C The wire’s centre stays in its present position and the wire rotates through 90° in a clockwise direction. 

 D The wire’s centre stays in its present position and the wire rotates through 90° in an anticlockwise direction. 

**27** The diagram shows point X between two charged plates. 

 + + + + + + 

- – – – – – 

### X 

 Which diagram shows the electric field pattern near point X? 

 A B C D 


© UCLES 2018 0625/22/O/N/18 

**28** A bar magnet is placed inside a current-carrying coil. The diagram shows four different experiments. 

 magnet slowly removed 

### 1 

 magnet slowly removed 

### 2 

 current in coil slowly reduced 

### 3 

### + – 

 current in coil slowly reduced 

### 4 

### + – 

 In which experiments is the magnet demagnetised? 

 A 1 and 2 B 1 and 3 C 2 and 4 D 3 and 4 

**29** Copper wire is available in fixed lengths but in various diameters _d_. Each diameter has a different resistance _R_. 

 Which relationship between R and d is correct? 

 A R is directly proportional to d. 

 B R is directly proportional to d^2. 

 C R is inversely proportional to d. 

 D R is inversely proportional to d^2. 

**30** A student investigates the resistance of a lamp. 

 Which row states how the meters must be connected? 

 ammeter voltmeter 

 A in parallel with the lamp in parallel with the lamp 

 B in parallel with the lamp in series with the lamp 

 C in series with the lamp in parallel with the lamp 

 D in series with the lamp in series with the lamp 


© UCLES 2018 0625/22/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**31** The circuit shown is used to change the voltage _V_ out as the temperature of device X changes. 

 device V out X 

### 0 V 

### +6.0 V 

 Which row is correct? 

 name of this type of circuit 

 name of device X 

 A potential divider fuse 

 B potential divider thermistor 

 C variable resistor fuse 

 D variable resistor thermistor 

**32** The circuit diagram shows a d.c. power supply connected to two resistors R 1 and R 2 and four diodes. 

### + – 

R 1 R (^2) Which statement is correct? **A** There is a current in R 1 and a current in R 2. **B** There is a current in R 1 but no current in R 2. **C** There is no current in R 1 but a current in R 2. **D** There is no current in R 1 and no current in R 2. 


© UCLES 2018 0625/22/O/N/18 

**33** A logic gate has inputs 0,0 and an output 1. 

 Which two types of logic gate behave in this way? 

 A OR, AND 

 B OR, NAND 

 C NOR, AND 

 D NOR, NAND 

**34** Either a fuse or a circuit-breaker can be used to protect electrical cables from large currents that could cause overheating. 

 electrical supply 

### X 

Y (^) appliance cable cable live neutral When a fuse is used, where should it be connected, and when a circuit-breaker is used, where should it be connected? position of fuse position of circuit-breaker **A** X X **B** X Y **C** Y X **D** Y Y **35** Electrical power is transmitted at 400 kV and transformed down to 240 V before being delivered to consumers. Which statement is correct? **A** A 400 kV cable requires less insulation than a 240 V cable. **B** Birds are subject to a high-voltage shock when resting on a high-voltage cable. **C** The current in the transmission wires is equal to the current delivered to the consumers. **D** With a 400 kV transmission system, a smaller proportion of the energy is used to heat the atmosphere than with a 240 V system. 


© UCLES 2018 0625/22/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**36** The diagram shows a coil of wire between the poles of a magnet. 

 20 turns 

# N S 

### + – 

 power supply 

 The coil consists of 20 turns of insulated wire. 

 The coil is connected to a variable resistor and a power supply. 

 How can the turning effect on the coil be increased? 

 A by moving the poles of the magnet closer to the coil 

 B by reducing the number of turns on the coil while keeping the current constant 

 C by increasing the resistance of the variable resistor 

 D by reversing the terminals of the power supply 

**37** Which diagram represents the structure of a neutral atom? 

### + 

+ (^) – 

### – 

### – 

 key neutron proton electron 

### A B 

### + + 

### – 

### + + 

### C 

### + 

### + + 

### D 

### – 

### – 

### – 

### – 

**38** A radioactive nucleus 22086 Rndecays in two stages to produce 21282 Pb. 

 Which two particles are emitted in this process? 

 A an α-particle and a β-particle 

 B an α-particle and a proton 

 C two α-particles 

 D two β-particles 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2018 0625/22/O/N/18 

**39** The diagram shows the paths of three different types of radiation X, Y and Z. 

### X 

### Y 

### Z 

 2 mm of plastic 

 10 mm of aluminium 

 50 mm of lead 

 Which row correctly identifies X, Y and Z? 

### X Y Z 

 A α-particles β-particles γ-rays 

 B β-particles α-particles γ-rays 

 C β-particles γ-rays α-particles 

 D γ-rays α-particles β-particles 

**40** The count rate measured when near a radioactive source drops from 542 counts per minute to 94 counts per minute in 12 hours. The background count remains constant at 30 counts per minute. 

 What is the half-life of the source? 

 A 2 hours B 3 hours C 4 hours D 8 hours 


