 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. IB18 03_0620_22/3RP© UCLES 2018 [Turn over 

# *3036484056* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/22 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) February/March 2018 Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet^ 45 minutes Soft clean eraserSoft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil.Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unlessthis has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

There areanswers **A** (^) , **forty B** , **C** questions on this paper. Answerand **D**. **all** questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the **one** you consider correct and record your choice in **soft pencil** on the separate Answer Sheet. **Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully.** Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer.Any rough working should be done in this booklet. A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16.Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2018 0620/22/F/M/18 

**1** Hydrogen chloride gas, HC _l_ , reacts with ammonia gas, NH 3 , to form solid ammonium chloride. The apparatus is set up as shown. After a few minutes, solid ammonium chloride forms where the two gases meet. solid ammonium chloride 

 source of hydrogen chloride gas 

 source of ammonia gas The experiment is repeated using hydrogen bromide, HBr, in place of hydrogen chloride. How far along the tube does the solid ammonium bromide form? A B C D 

 source of hydrogen bromide gas 

 source of ammonia gas 

**2** Substance L melts at –7 °C and is a brown liquid at room temperature. Which temperature is the boiling point of pure L? **A** –77 °C **B** –7 °C to +7 °C **C** 59 °C **D** 107 °C to 117 °C 


© UCLES 2018 0620/22/F/M/18 **[Turn over** 

**3** Chromatography is done on a mixture containing a drug. The drug has an _R_ f value of 0.66. The diagram is **not** drawn to scale. Which spot on the chromatogram represents the drug? 

 15 cm 

 0.66 cm 

 9.9 cm 

 12 cm 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 

 solvent front 

 baseline 

**4** Caesium, Cs, is an element in Group I of the Periodic Table. When caesium reacts it forms a positive ion, Cs +. How is a caesium ion formed? **A** A caesium atom gains a proton. **B** A caesium atom gains an electron. **C** A caesium atom loses an electron. **D** A caesium atom shares an electron. 

**5** The structure of copper is described as a lattice of positive ions in a ‘sea of electrons’. Which statements are correct? 1 Copper has a high melting point because of the strong electrostatic attraction between the positive ions and the ‘sea of electrons’. 2 Copper is malleable because the layers of atoms in the lattice can slide over eachother. 3 Copper atoms can be oxidised to form copper ions by losing electrons. **A** 1, 2 and 3 **B** 1 and 2 only **C** 1 and 3 only **D** 2 and 3 only 


© UCLES 2018 0620/22/F/M/18 

# 6 Three statements about diamond, graphite and silicon(IV) oxide are listed. 

 1 Diamond and graphite both have giant covalent structures. 

# 2 In silicon(IV) oxide, silicon and oxygen atoms are joined together by covalent bonds 

 throughout the whole structure. 

# 3 Diamond and silicon(IV) oxide have similar structures. 

 Which statements are correct? A 1, 2 and 3 B 1 and 2 only C 1 and 3 only D 2 and 3 only 

**7** The concentration of a hydrochloric acid solution is 0.5 mol / dm^3. How many moles of hydrochloric acid are present in 25 cm^3 of this solution? **A** 0.0125 **B** 0.0200 **C** 12.5 **D** 20.0 

**8** A sample of an iron oxide contains 50.4 g of iron and 21.6 g of oxygen. What is the empirical formula of the iron oxide? **A** FeO **B** FeO 3 **C** Fe 2 O 3 **D** Fe 3 O 2 

# 9 A solution of copper(II) sulfate can be electrolysed using copper electrodes or carbon electrodes. 

 Which statements are correct? 1 Using copper electrodes, oxygen gas forms at the anode. 2 Using copper electrodes, copper atoms lose electrons at the anode. 3 Using carbon electrodes, copper metal forms at the cathode. 4 Using carbon electrodes, copper ions gain electrons at the cathode. A 1 and 2 B 1 and 3 C 2, 3 and 4 D 4 only 


© UCLES 2018 0620/22/F/M/18 **[Turn over** 

**10** Pairs of metals are connected together to make a simple cell, as shown. 

 V 

 metal 2 

 voltmeter 

 electrolyte 

 metal 1 

 The table shows the reading on the voltmeter when different metals are used. metal 2 beryllium cerium cobalt manganese 

 metal 1 

 beryllium^ 0.00^ V^ +0.64^ V^ –1.57^ V^ –0.67^ V cerium 0.00 V –2.21 V –1.30 V cobalt 0.00 V +0.90 V manganese 0.00 V If metal 2 is more reactive than metal 1, the voltage measured is positive. The greater the difference in reactivity of the metals, the larger the reading on the voltmeter. What is the order of reactivity? most reactive 

 least reactive A cerium beryllium cobalt manganese B cerium beryllium manganese cobalt C cobalt manganese beryllium cerium D cobalt manganese cerium beryllium 


© UCLES 2018 0620/22/F/M/18 

**11** The energy level diagram for the reaction between X 2 and Y 2 to form XY gas is shown. 

 energy 

 progress of reaction 

 X 2 (g) + Y 2 (g) 2XY(g) 

 Which statement is correct? A Energy is released when X 2 and Y 2 bonds are broken. B Energy is needed to form XY bonds. C The energy change, ∆ H , for the reaction is negative. D The reaction is endothermic. 

**12** Methane burns in oxygen to form carbon dioxide and water. CH 4 + 2O 2 → CO 2 + 2H 2 O The bond energies are shown in the table. bond bond energyin kJ / mol C–H +410 C=O +805 O–H +460 O=O +496 What is the energy change for the reaction? **A** –818 kJ / mol **B** –323 kJ / mol **C** +323 kJ / mol **D** +818 kJ / mol 


© UCLES 2018 0620/22/F/M/18 **[Turn over** 

**13** Methanol is made by reacting carbon monoxide with hydrogen. The reaction is reversible. CO(g) + 2H 2 (g) CH 3 OH(g) The forward reaction is exothermic. Which combination of temperature and pressure gives the highest equilibrium yield of methanol? temperature / °C / atmospherespressure **A** 200 10 **B** 200 200 **C** 600 10 **D** 600 200 

**14** The ionic equation for the reaction between zinc and aqueous copper ions is shown. Zn(s) + Cu 2+(aq) → Zn 2+(aq) + Cu(s) Which statement about this reaction is correct? **A** Copper ions are oxidised and their oxidation state changes. **B** Copper ions are reduced because they lose electrons. **C** Zinc atoms are oxidised and their oxidation state changes. **D** Zinc atoms are reduced because they gain electrons. 

**15** In which reaction is the rate of reaction **not** affected by light? **A** the conversion of carbon dioxide and water to glucose and oxygen in green plants **B** the reaction of bromine with ethene **C** the reaction of chlorine with methane **D** the reduction of silver ions to silver 


© UCLES 2018 0620/22/F/M/18 

**16** Calcium carbonate reacts with dilute hydrochloric acid to form bubbles of carbon dioxide. At a higher temperature, the same reaction is faster. Which row explains this observation? collision rate number of molecules withsufficient energy to react **A** increases more **B** increases the same **C** stays the same more **D** stays the same the same 

**17** Ethanoic acid reacts with water to produce an acidic solution. Which row describes the roles of ethanoic acid and water in this reaction? ethanoic acid water **A** accepts a proton donates a proton **B** accepts an electron donates an electron **C** donates a proton accepts a proton **D** donates an electron accepts an electron 

**18** A solution of compound Z gives a light blue precipitate with aqueous ammonia. The precipitate dissolves in an excess of ammonia. A flame test is done on compound Z. What is the colour of the flame? **A** blue-green **B** lilac **C** red **D** yellow 

**19** Carbon, copper, magnesium, sodium and sulfur can all form oxides. How many of these elements form acidic oxides? **A** 1 **B** 2 **C** 3 **D** 4 


© UCLES 2018 0620/22/F/M/18 **[Turn over** 

# 20 Which method is used to make the salt copper(II) sulfate? 

 A dilute acid + alkali B dilute acid + carbonate C dilute acid + metal D dilute acid + non-metal oxide 

**21** The Periodic Table lists all the known elements. Elements are arranged in order of ....... 1 ....... number. The melting points of Group I elements ....... 2 ....... down the group. The melting points of Group VII elements ....... 3 ....... down the group. Which words correctly complete gaps 1, 2 and 3? 1 2 3 **A** nucleon decrease increase **B** nucleon increase decrease **C** proton decrease increase **D** proton increase decrease 

**22** Metal X reacts with non-metal Y to form an ionic compound with the formula X 2 Y. Which statements are correct? 1 X is in Group I of the Periodic Table. 2 X is in Group II of the Periodic Table. 3 Y is in Group VI of the Periodic Table. 4 Y is in Group VII of the Periodic Table. **A** 1 and 3 **B** 1 and 4 **C** 2 and 3 **D** 2 and 4 


© UCLES 2018 0620/22/F/M/18 

**23** Which statements about Group I and Group VII elements are correct? 1 In Group I, lithium is more reactive than potassium. 2 In Group VII, chlorine is more reactive than fluorine. statement 1 statement 2 **A**   **B**   **C**   **D**   

**24** Which two properties are physical properties of **all** pure metals? 

 property 1 property 2 A brittle poor conductor of heat B good conductor of electricity malleable C good conductor of heat low melting point D malleable low density 

**25** Aluminium is extracted from aluminium oxide using electrolysis. Carbon dioxide is formed in this process. Which equation shows the formation of carbon dioxide during the extraction of aluminium from aluminium oxide by electrolysis? 

**A** A _l_ (^) 2 (CO 3 ) 3 → A _l_ (^) 2 O 3 + 3CO 2 **B** A _l_ (^) 2 O 3 + 3CO → 2A _l_ + 3CO 2 **C** C + O 2 → CO 2 **D** C4+^ + 2O2–^ → CO 2 **26** A sample of solid X was added to three different solutions to predict the position of X in thereactivity series. X(s) + FeSO 4 (aq) → no reaction X(s) + 2HC _l_ (aq) → XC _l_ (^) 2 (aq) + H 2 (g) X(s) + Zn(NO 3 ) 2 (aq) → no reaction Which other solution would react with solid X? **A** CaSO 4 (aq) **B** CuSO 4 (aq) **C** MgSO 4 (aq) **D** Na 2 SO 4 (aq) 


© UCLES 2018 0620/22/F/M/18 **[Turn over** 

**27** Which statement about the uses of aluminium, copper and iron is correct? **A** Aluminium is used for aircraft manufacture because it has a high density. **B** Aluminium is used for food containers because it is a good conductor of electricity. **C** Copper is used for cooking utensils because it is a good conductor of heat. **D** Stainless steel is used for car bodies because it corrodes easily. 

**28** Air is a mixture of gases. The melting and boiling points of some gases present in clean, dry air are shown. In the fractional distillation of liquid air, which gas boils first? 

gas (^) melting point / °C boiling point / °C **A** argon –189 –186 **B** krypton –157 –153 **C** nitrogen –210 –196 **D** oxygen –219 –183 **29** Water must be purified before it is suitable for use in the home. Which processes are used to remove solid impurities and to kill bacteria? to remove solid impurities to kill bacteria **A** chlorination chlorination **B** chlorination filtration **C** filtration chlorination **D** filtration filtration **30** Which processes do **not** produce carbon dioxide? 1 heating limestone 2 burning gasoline in car engines 3 photosynthesis 4 production of nylon **A** 1 and 2 **B** 1 and 3 **C** 2 and 4 **D** 3 and 4 


© UCLES 2018 0620/22/F/M/18 

**31** Which pair of compounds would make an NPK fertiliser? **A** ammonium sulfate and potassium phosphate **B** calcium hydroxide and ammonium nitrate **C** calcium phosphate and potassium chloride **D** potassium nitrate and ammonium sulfate 

**32** Which pollutant gas is produced by the decomposition of vegetation? **A** carbon monoxide **B** methane **C** nitrogen dioxide **D** sulfur dioxide 

**33** The equation for the formation of sulfur trioxide from sulfur dioxide is shown. 2SO 2 (g) + O 2 (g) 2SO 3 (g) The forward reaction is exothermic. Whichsulfur trioxide? combination of pressure and temperature gives the highest equilibrium yield of 

 pressure temperature A high high B high low C low high D low low 


© UCLES 2018 0620/22/F/M/18 **[Turn over** 

**34** The diagram shows the pH values of the soil in two parts of a garden, X and Y. 

## X 

 pH 7.0 

## Y 

 pH 5.5 

 Lime is used to neutralise the soil in one part of the garden. To which part of the garden should the lime be added and why? part of the garden because lime is A X acidic B X basic C Y acidic D Y basic 

**35** Statement 1 Hydrogen is used as a fuel. Statement 2 When hydrogen burns in the air to form water, heat energy is produced. Which is correct? **A** Both statements are correct and statement 2 explains statement 1. **B** Both statements are correct but statement 2 does not explain statement 1. **C** Statement 1 is correct but statement 2 is incorrect. **D** Statement 2 is correct but statement 1 is incorrect. 

**36** Which row identifies compounds in the same homologous series? 

 chemical properties 

 functional group A different different B different same C similar different D similar same 


© UCLES 2018 0620/22/F/M/18 

**37** Three chemical reactions are shown. 1 catalytic addition of steam to ethene 2 combustion of ethanol 3 fermentation of glucose In which of the reactions does the relative molecular mass of the carbon-containing compound decrease? **A** 1 and 2 **B** 1 only **C** 2 and 3 **D** 3 only 

**38** How is ethanol produced by fermentation? **A** using anaerobic conditions at 30 °C **B** using anaerobic conditions at 450 °C **C** using steam at 30 °C **D** using steam at 450 °C 

**39** Which substances react together to form ethyl propanoate? **A** ethanoic acid and propanol **B** ethanol and propene **C** ethene and propanol **D** propanoic acid and ethanol 

**40** The structure of a chlorofluorocarbon polymer is shown. 

 C H 

CH (^3) C F C _l_ C H CH (^3) C F C _l_ Which monomer is used to make this polymer? 

## C 

## F 

CH (^3) CH (^3) 

## C 

## A 

## H 

 C l C 

## H 

## C 

## B 

## F 

 C l C C l 

CH (^3) C 

## C 

## H 

## F 

## C 

 C l 

CH (^3) C 

## D 

## F 

## H 


## BLANK PAGE 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeInternational Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge LocalExaminations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2018 0620/22/F/M/18 


© UCLES 2018 0620/22/F/M/18 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements^1 Hhydrogen^1 

(^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Beberyllium 9 **Key** atomic numberatomic symbol name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mgmagnesium 24 19 Kpotassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Srstrontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Gegermanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 (^22) Tititanium (^4840) Zrzirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rfrutherfordium– 23 Vvanadium (^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Crchromium (^5242) Momolybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sgseaborgium– (^25) Mnmanganese (^5543) Tctechnetium– (^75) Rerhenium (^186107) Bhbohrium– (^26) Feiron (^5644) Ruruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Iriridium (^192109) Mtmeitnerium– (^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pdpalladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Dsdarmstadtium– (^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rgroentgenium– (^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cdcadmium (^11280) Hgmercury (^201112) Cncopernicium– 114 F _l_ flerovium– (^116) Lvlivermorium– (^7) Nnitrogen 1415 Pphosphorus (^3133) Asarsenic (^7551) Sbantimony 12283 Bibismuth 209 (^8) Ooxygen 1616 Ssulfur (^3234) Seselenium (^7952) Tetellurium (^12884) Popolonium– (^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Brbromine 8053 I iodine 12785 Atastatine– (^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Scscandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) Lalanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). actinium– (^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium^141 (^91) Paprotactinium 231 (^60) Ndneodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pmpromethium– (^93) Npneptunium– (^62) Smsamarium (^15094) Puplutonium– (^63) Eueuropium (^15295) Amamericium– (^64) Gdgadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bkberkelium– (^66) Dydysprosium 16398 Cfcalifornium– (^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Eseinsteinium– (^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Mdmendelevium– (^70) Ybytterbium (^173102) Nonobelium– (^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lrlawrencium– 


