 This document consists of 10 printed pages. 

© UCLES 2019 **[Turn over** 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

**ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/22** 

Paper 2 **October/November 2019** 

MARK SCHEME 

Maximum Mark: 80 

 Published 

This mark scheme is published as an aid to teachers and candidates, to indicate the requirements of the examination. It shows the basis on which Examiners were instructed to award marks. It does not indicate the details of the discussions that took place at an Examiners’ meeting before marking began, which would have considered the acceptability of alternative answers. 

Mark schemes should be read in conjunction with the question paper and the Principal Examiner Report for Teachers. 

Cambridge International will not enter into discussions about these mark schemes. 

Cambridge International is publishing the mark schemes for the October/November 2019 series for most Cambridge IGCSE™, Cambridge International A and AS Level components and some Cambridge O Level components. 


###### PUBLISHED 

###### 2019 

 Generic Marking Principles 

These general marking principles must be applied by all examiners when marking candidate answers. They should be applied alongside the specific content of the mark scheme or generic level descriptors for a question. Each question paper and mark scheme will also comply with these marking principles. 

###### GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 1: 

 Marks must be awarded in line with: 

- the specific content of the mark scheme or the generic level descriptors for the question 

- the specific skills defined in the mark scheme or in the generic level descriptors for the question 

- the standard of response required by a candidate as exemplified by the standardisation scripts. 

 GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 2: 

 Marks awarded are always whole marks (not half marks, or other fractions). 

 GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 3: 

 Marks must be awarded positively : 

- marks are awarded for correct/valid answers, as defined in the mark scheme. However, credit     is given for valid answers which go beyond the scope of the syllabus and mark scheme,     referring to your Team Leader as appropriate 

- marks are awarded when candidates clearly demonstrate what they know and can do 

- marks are not deducted for errors 

- marks are not deducted for omissions 

- answers should only be judged on the quality of spelling, punctuation and grammar when these     features are specifically assessed by the question as indicated by the mark scheme. The     meaning, however, should be unambiguous. 

 GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 4: 

 Rules must be applied consistently e.g. in situations where candidates have not followed instructions or in the application of generic level descriptors. 

 GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 5: 

 Marks should be awarded using the full range of marks defined in the mark scheme for the question (however; the use of the full mark range may be limited according to the quality of the candidate responses seen). 

 GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 6: 

 Marks awarded are based solely on the requirements as defined in the mark scheme. Marks should not be awarded with grade thresholds or grade descriptors in mind. 


###### PUBLISHED 

###### 2019 

###### MARK SCHEME NOTES 

The following notes are intended to aid interpretation of mark schemes in general, but individual mark schemes may include marks awarded for specific reasons outside the scope of these notes. 

**Types of mark** 

M Method marks, awarded for a valid method applied to the problem. 

A Accuracy mark, awarded for a correct answer or intermediate step correctly obtained. For accuracy marks to be given, the associated Method mark must be earned or implied. 

B Mark for a correct result or statement independent of Method marks. 

When a part of a question has two or more ‘method’ steps, the M marks are in principle independent unless the scheme specifically says otherwise; and similarly where there are several B marks allocated. The notation ‘ **dep** ’ is used to indicate that a particular M or B mark is dependent on an earlier mark in the scheme. 

**Abbreviations** 

awrt answers which round to cao correct answer only dep dependent FT follow through after error isw ignore subsequent working nfww not from wrong working oe or equivalent rot rounded or truncated SC Special Case soi seen or implied 


###### PUBLISHED 

###### 2019 

**Question Answer Marks Guidance** 

 1 

_A_ (^) _B_ 

###### B1 

###### B1 

###### B 1 

(^2) d 6cos3 d _y x x_ 

###### = 

###### B1 

 − 3sin3 x B1 

 2 2 

 d 18sin 3 9cos3 d 

 y x x x 

###### = − − 

###### B1 

 FT Correct derivative of their d d 

 y x 

 Insert and collect like terms M1 Must insert for y , their 

 d d 

 y x 

 and 

 2 2 

 d d 

 y x correctly resulting in 6 terms. 

 k = –15 A1 Allow –15sin3 x seen nfww 

3(i) (^14) _P_ 5 or 14 × 13 × 12 × 11 × 10 **M1** 240 240 **A1** cao 3(ii) (^3) _P_ 1 × 5 _P_ 2 × 6 _P_ 2 or 3 × (5 × 4) × (6 × 5) **M1** Two of the three elements multiplied by … = 1800 **A1** 3(iii) (^6) _P_ 2 × 8 _P_ 3 or (6 × 5) × (8 × 7 × 6) **M1** One element multiplied by … Clear intention to multiply = 10 080 **A1** 


###### PUBLISHED 

###### 2019 

**Question Answer Marks Guidance** 

 4 kx + 3 = x^2 + 5 x + 12 → x^2 + (5 – k ) x + 9(= 0) 

 M1 Equate and attempt to simplify to all terms on one side. 

 Use discriminant of their quadratic. M1 dep 

(5 – _k_ ) 2 – 36 oe (^) **A1** Unsimplified _k_ = –1 and 11 **A1** Both boundary values –1 < _k_ < 11 **A1** (^) Must be in terms of ݇. **OR** 2 _x_ + 5 ~ _k_ **M1** Connect gradients of line and curve 

#### ( ) 

 2 2 

###### 2 5 3 

###### 2 5 3 5 12 

 y x x x x x x 

###### = + + → 

###### + + = + + 

 M1 Eliminate ݇ and y. 

 x^2 = 9 → x = ± 3 A1 

 k = 11 or k = –1 A1 

 –1 < k < 11 A1 

 5(i) 

#### ( ) 

 3 

 d 2 

d (^1) _y k x_ (^) _x_ 

###### − 

###### = 

###### + 

 B1 oe Unsimplified 

 Gradient of normal = 

#### ( ) 

###### 13 

###### 2 

 x k 

###### + 

 or Gradient of tangent = −3 

 M1 Gradient of normal = 1 gradient of tangent 

###### − 

(^8 1) or 2 3 2 3 8 _k k_ 

###### = = − 

###### M1 

 Equate gradient of normal to 

###### 1 

###### 3 

 at 

 x = 1 or equate gradient of tangent to –3 at x =1 

 k = 12 A1 

5(ii) (^) d 8 2 d 9 _y x x_ = → = − or _their_ 

###### 2 

###### 27 

 − k B1^ FT 

###### 4 

###### 3 

 y = or their 9 

 k B1 FT 

 4 

(^3 8) or^8 28 2 9 9 9 _y y x x_ 

###### − 

###### = − = − + 

###### − 

 B1 isw 


###### PUBLISHED 

###### 2019 

**Question Answer Marks Guidance** 

 6(i) sincos^ cos^1 1 sin cos cos 

###### 1 

###### 1 

 x x x x x x 

###### + 

###### + 

###### + 

###### M1 

Use (^) tan sin^ and sec^1 cos cos _x x x x x_ 

###### = = 

 throughout 

 sin 1 cos 1 cos sin 

 x x x x 

###### + 

###### + 

###### + 

 M1 dep Multiply by cosݔ 

#### ( ) 

 sin^2  1 2cos cos^2 1 cos sin 

 x x x x x 

###### + + + 

###### + 

 M1 dep Add their fractions correctly and expand (1 + cos x ) 2 correctly 

#### ( ) 

#### ( ) 

 2 1 cos 1 cos sin 

 x x x 

###### + 

###### + 

 M1 dep Use sin 2 x + cos^2 x = 1 and take out a factor of 2. 

 All correct AG A1 Do not award if brackets missing at any point or ݔ missing more than twice or ݔ misplaced. Do not credit mixed variables. 

 OR 

#### ( ) 

#### ( ) 

 2 2 tan sec 1 tan sec 1 

 x x x x 

###### + + 

###### + 

 M1 Add fractions 

### ( ) 

 2sec^2 2sec tan sec 1 

 x x x x 

###### + 

###### = 

###### + 

 M1 dep Expand brackets correctly and use 1 + tan 2 x = sec^2 x 

 2sec tan 

 x x 

 M1 dep Cancel secݔ + 1 

 2 cos cos sin 

 x x x 

###### × 

 M1 dep 

 Use 

 sin 1 tan and sec cos cos 

 x x x x x 

 = = oe 

 All correct AG A1 Do not award if brackets missing at any point or ݔ missing more than twice or ݔ misplaced. Do not credit mixed variables. 

6(ii) 3sin 2 _x_ + sin _x_ – 2 = 0 oe (^) **B1** Obtain three term quadratic. (3sin _x_ – 2)(sin _x_ + 1) = 0 **M1** Solve three term quadratic 41.8° awrt **A1** 138.2° awrt **A1** Mark final answers This mark is not awarded if there are more solutions in the range. 


###### PUBLISHED 

###### 2019 

**Question Answer Marks Guidance** 

7(a) (^2) × 4 × _p_ = 40 → _p_ = 5 **B1** May be obtained later. ( _x_ – 2)( _x_ – 4)( _x_ – _p_ ) = 0 **M1** Factorise cubic _a_ = –11 **A1** Expand and identify _b_ = 38 **A1 OR** 2 × 4 × _p_ = 40 → _p_ = 5 **B1**^ May be obtained later. Obtain equations 4 _a_ + 2 _b_ = 32 16 _a_ + 4 _b_ = –24 and attempt to solve 

###### M1 

 a = –11 A1 

 b = 38 A1 

 7(b) Find x = –1 M1 Trial value/s and finds a root or shows that ( x + 1) or ( x + 4) or ( x – 10) divides into x^3 – 5 x^2 – 46 x – 40. 

 ( x + 1)( x^2 – 6 x – 40) (= 0) or ( x + 4)( x^2 – 9 x – 10)(= 0) or ( x – 10)( x^2 + 5 x + 4)(= 0) 

 A1 Factorise to give linear and quadratic factor 

 ( x + 1)( x + 4)( x – 10) (= 0) M1 Solve the quadratic to give 2 roots 

_x_ = –1, –4, 10 (^) **A1 OR** Uses factor theorem to find a root (–1)^3 – 5(–1^2 ) – 46(–1) – 40 or –1 – 5 + 46 – 40 = 0 → _x_ = –1 **M1** This may be awarded for _x_ = –4 or _x_ = 10. Uses factor theorem to attempt to find further roots **M1** At least two more trials. 

###### (–4)^3 – 5(–4)^2 – 46(–4) – 40 

 or – 64 – 80 + 184 – 40 = 0 → x = –4 

###### A1 

###### (10)^3 – 5(10)^2 – 46(10) – 40 

 or 1000 – 500 – 460 – 40 = 0 → x = 10 

###### A1 


###### PUBLISHED 

###### 2019 

**Question Answer Marks Guidance** 

8(i) (^52) + 122 = 13 **M1** 

#### ( ) 

###### 5 1 

 6 or 5 12 2 2 

**_v_** (^) **_A_** = − **i** − **j** − **i** − **j** 

###### A1 

 8(ii) 

#### ( ) 

 12 2 vB = 12 + − 9 

 M1 Use Pythagoras 

 15 A1 Do not allow ± 15. Mark final answer. 

 8(iii) 

#### ( ) ( ) 

###### 20 2.5 

###### 7 6 

 or 20 2.5 7 6 

 t 

 t t 

######    −  

= (^)   +    −^   −  = − **i** + − − **j** **_A A r r_** **B1 FT** on _their_ **_v_** _A_ only if of the form _k_ (–5 **i** – 12 **j** ) where _k_ ≠ 1 or 0. 

#### ( ) ( ) 

###### 67 12 

###### 11 9 

 or 67 12 11 9 

 t 

 t t 

######  −    

= (^)   +      −  = − + **i** + − **j** **_B B r r_** 

###### B1 

 8(iv) 20 – 2.5 t = –67 + 12 t or –7 – 6 t = 11 – 9 t 

 M1 Equate ݔ or ݕ coordinates. Must have two terms in both coordinates. 

 t = 6 A1 nfww Ignore other value of t. 

 5 43 

######   

= (^)    −  **_r_** only or **_r_** = 5 **i –** 43 **j A1** (^) **A0** if further value of ࢘ found. 9(i) Midpoint (1, 2) (^) **B1** May be seen on diagram Gradient of _AB=_^3 4 

###### − 

###### B1 

 Gradient of PM 1 4 their gradient of AB 3 

###### − 

###### = = 

**M1** (^) Use _m_ 1 × _m_ 2 = –1 Equation _PM_^2 4 1 3 _y x_ − (^) = − **M1 dep** Attempt to find equation of line with _their_ midpoint and _their_ gradient of _PM._ If _y_ = _mx_ + _c_ used _c_ must be found. 4 2 3 3 _y_ = _x_ + 

###### A1 

9(ii) (^4 2) 3 3 _s_ = _r_ + 

###### B1 FT 

 Insert ( r , s ) into their linear equation to 


###### PUBLISHED 

###### 2019 

**Question Answer Marks Guidance** 

 obtain ݏ =… 

 9(iii) ( r – 1) 2 + ( s – 2)^2 = 100 oe B1 FT Use Pythagoras with their (1, 2) 

 Eliminate r or s M1 From one linear and one quadratic expression. Unsimplified 

 25 r^2 –50 r – 875 = 0 oe or 25 s^2 –100 s – 1500 = 0 oe 

###### A1 

 (5 r +25)(5 r –35) = 0 oe or (5 s – 50)(5 s + 30) = 0 oe 

 M1 Solve three term quadratic Can be implied by correct solution. 

_r_ = 7, _s_ = 10 (^) **A1** Do not award if negative values of ݎ and ݏ are also given nfww **OR** Equivalent method such as: 

##### →^2 +^2 =^100 

#####  

#####  

#####  

#####  

#####  

##### = a b 

##### b 

##### a 

##### MP and 

###### 4 

###### 3 

 b a 

 = B1^ Using distance =10 and gradient =^ 

###### 4 

###### 3 

###### . 

 Eliminate a or b M1 

 2 2 

 2 2 

###### 4 

###### 100 

###### 3 

###### 3 

 or 100 4 

 a a 

 b b 

###### + ^  = 

######   

######   

  (^) + =     

###### A1 

 → a = (±)6 and b = (±)8 M1^ Solve 

 r = 7, s = 10 A1 

 10(i) Quotient rule or product rule M1 

 4 4 

 2 ln ln .2 or 

 x x x x x x x x 

###### − − 

 oe isw 

 A2/1/0 Minus one each error. Allow unsimplified. 

 10(ii) x – 2 x ln x = 0 M1 Set 

 d 0 d 

 y x 

 = and attempt to solve. Must 

 have two terms and obtain ln x = k only. 

 x = 1.65 awrtor e A1 

 y = 0.184 awrt or 1 2e 

###### A1 


###### PUBLISHED 

###### 2019 

**Question Answer Marks Guidance** 

 10(iii) 2 3 3 

 ln 1 2ln d 

 x x x x x x 

##### = ⌠ − 

##### ⌡ 

 M1 Integrate their derivative from (i) which must have two terms. Condone omission of dݔ. 

 2 

###### 1 

 2 x 

###### − A1^ 

Find (^3) 

###### 1 

 d x x 

##### ⌠ 

##### ⌡ 

#### 3 2 2 (^ ) 

 ln 1 ln d 4 2 

 x x x C x x x 

##### ⌠ = − − + 

##### ⌡ 

 A1 oe Rearrange and complete 

 10(iv) Insert limits and subtract correctly M1 dep Must be inserting into two terms in ݔ from (iii). Values explicitly seen if expression is incorrect. 

 3 ln 2 16 8 

 − or 0.101 awrt 

###### A1 

(^11) ( 5 − (^3) )( 5 + (^3) ) = − 4 **B1** Seen anywhere Attempt formula **M1** 

## ( ) 

###### 3 5 

###### 2 5 3 

 x 

###### − ± 

###### = 

###### − 

###### A1 

Multiply by _their_ (^) ( 5 + (^3) ) **M1**^ Attempt must be seen with a further line of working. oe _x_ = 5 + 3 **A1**^ oe Mark final answer (^1) ( (^5 3) ) 4 _x_ 

###### − + 

###### = 

 A1 oe Mark final answer 


