 This document consists of 16 printed pages. 

 DC (LEG/SG) 172298/2 © UCLES 2019 [Turn over 

* 5 1 9 2 8 8 5 9 0 1 * 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/22 Paper 2 October/November 2019 2 hours Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all the questions. Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/22/O/N/19** 

 Mathematical Formulae 

##### 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

 x 

 b b ac a 

##### = 

##### − 2 − 4 

##### 2 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( _n_ 

# 1 ) a 

_n_ –1 (^) _b_ + 

# ( 

 n 

# 2 ) a 

_n_ –2 (^) _b_ (^2) + … + 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) a 

_n_ – _r_ (^) _br_ (^) + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( _n_ 

# r ) =^ 

 n! ( n – r )! r! 

##### 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ 

 sin^2 A + cos^2 A = 1 

 sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A 

 cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC_ 

 a sin A =^ 

 b sin B =^ 

 c sin C 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

 ∆ = 1 2 

 bc sin A 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/22/O/N/19 [Turn over** 

#### 1 On each of the Venn diagrams below, shade the region indicated. 

#####  

##### A B 

#### ^ A l^ + B h , ^ A + B lh 

#####  

##### A B 

##### C 

#### ^ A + B h, C 

#####  

##### A B 

##### C 

 A + B + C l [3] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/22/O/N/19** 

#### 2 Given that y = 2 sin 3 x + cos 3 x , show that 

 d 

 d d 

 d sin x 

 y x 

 y 2 3 y^^ k^^3 x 

 2 + + = , where k is a constant to be determined. [5] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/22/O/N/19 [Turn over** 

#### 3 A 5-digit code is formed using the following characters. 

 Letters a e i o u Numbers 1 2 3 4 5 6 Symbols @ ∗ # 

 No character can be repeated in a code. Find the number of possible codes if 

#### (i) there are no restrictions, [2] 

#### (ii) the code starts with a symbol followed by two letters and then two numbers, [2] 

#### (iii) the first two characters are numbers, and no other numbers appear in the code. [2] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/22/O/N/19** 

#### 4 Find the values of k for which the line y = kx + 3 does not meet the curve y = x^2 + 5 x + 12. [5] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/22/O/N/19 [Turn over** 

#### 5 At the point where x = 1 on the curve y 

 x 

 k 1 2 

##### = 

^ (^) + h , the normal has a gradient of 31. 

#### (i) Find the value of the constant k. [4] 

#### (ii) Using your value of k , find the equation of the tangent to the curve at x = 2. [3] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/22/O/N/19** 

**6 (i)** Show that (^1) +tan sec _xx_ + 1 +tan^ sec _xx_ = (^) sin^2 _x_. [5] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/22/O/N/19 [Turn over** 

**(ii)** Hence solve the equation (^1) +tan sec _x x_ + 1 +tan^ sec _x_^ _x_^ = 1 + 3 sin _x_ for 0 c G _x_ G 180 c. [4] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/22/O/N/19** 

#### 7 (a) The cubic equation x^3 + ax^2 + bx 40 = 0 has three positive integer roots. Two of the roots are 2 

 and 4. Find the other root and the value of each of the integers a and b. [4] 

#### (b) Do not use a calculator in this question. 

 Solve the equation x^3 5 x^2 46 x 40 = 0 given that it has three integer roots, only one of which is positive. [4] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/22/O/N/19 [Turn over** 

#### 8 (i) A particle A travels with a speed of 6.5 ms–1^ in the direction 5 i 12 j. Find the velocity, vA , of A. [2] 

#### (ii) A particle B travels with velocity vB = 12 i 9 j. Find the speed, in ms–1, of B. [2] 

 Particle A starts moving from the point with position vector 20 i 7 j. At the same time particle B starts moving from the point with position vector 67 i + 11 j. 

**(iii)** Find **_r_** (^) **_A_** , the position vector of _A_ after _t_ seconds, and **_r_** (^) **_B_** , the position vector of _B_ after _t_ seconds. [2] 

#### (iv) Find the time when the particles collide and the position vector of the point of collision. [3] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/22/O/N/19** 

#### 9 

##### M 

##### P 

##### B (5,-1) 

##### A (-3,5) 

 ( r , s ) 

 The diagram shows the points A (–3, 5) and B (5, –1). The mid-point of AB is M and the line PM is perpendicular to AB. The point P has coordinates ( r , s ). 

#### (i) Find the equation of the line PM in the form y = mx + c , where m and c are exact constants. [5] 

#### (ii) Hence find an expression for s in terms of r. [1] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/22/O/N/19 [Turn over** 

#### (iii) Given that the length of PM is 10 units, find the value of r and of s. [5] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/22/O/N/19** 

#### 10 (i) Given that y ln 

 x 

 x = 2 , find d 

 d x 

 y 

. [3] 

#### (ii) Find the coordinates of the stationary point on the curve y ln 

 x 

 x = 2. [3] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/22/O/N/19 [Turn over** 

#### (iii) Using your answer to part (i) , find ln d 

 x 

_x_ (^) _x_ 

### y 3. [3] 

#### (iv) Hence evaluate 

 1 

 2 ln d x 

_x_ (^) _x_ 

## y 3. [2] 

#### Question 11 is printed on the next page. 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/22/O/N/19** 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. 

#### 11 Do not use a calculator in this question. 

#### Solve the quadratic equation ^^5 3 h x^^2 + 3 x + ^ 5 + 3 h^ = 0 , giving your answers in the form a + b 5 , 

 where a and b are constants. [6] 


