 This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. 

 DC (NH/FC) 172299/2 © UCLES 2019 [Turn over 

* 3 6 2 9 9 0 0 2 3 0 * 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/23 Paper 2 October/November 2019 2 hours Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all the questions. Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/23/O/N/19** 

 Mathematical Formulae 

### 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

 x b^ 2 ba^^4 ac 

### !^2 

## = -^ -^. 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( _n_ 

# 1 ) a 

_n_ –1 (^) _b_ + 

# ( 

 n 

# 2 ) a 

_n_ –2 (^) _b_ (^2) + … + 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) a 

_n_ – _r_ (^) _br_ (^) + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( _n_ 

# r ) =^ 

 n! ( n – r )! r! 

### . 

### 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ 

 sin^2 A + cos^2 A = 1 

 sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A 

 cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC_ 

 a sin A =^ 

 b sin B =^ 

 c sin C 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

 ∆ = 

 1 2 bc^ sin^ A 


## ©UCLES 2019 0606/23/O/N/19 [Turn over 

## 1 Solve 3 x + 2 = x + 4. [3] 

## 2 (i) Show that cos 1 ec x^ cos^ -^ cot x^ x^ = cosec x. [3] 

## (ii) Hence solve cos 1 ec^ x cos^ -^ cot x x = 2 for 0 ° 1 x 1 180 °. [2] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/23/O/N/19** 

## 3 The first four terms in the expansion of ( 1 + ax ) (^5 2 + bx ) are 2 + 32 x + 210 x^2 + cx^3 , where a , b and c are 

 integers. Show that 3 a^2 16 a + 21 = 0 and hence find the values of a , b and c. [8] 


## ©UCLES 2019 0606/23/O/N/19 [Turn over 

## 4 (i) Given that y = 2 x^2 4 x 7 , write y in the form a x ( b )^2 + c , where a , b and c are constants. [3] 

## (ii) Hence write down the minimum value of y and the value of x at which it occurs. [2] 

## (iii) Using your answer to part (i) , solve the equation 2 p 4 p 7 = 0 , giving your answer correct to 

 2 decimal places. [3] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/23/O/N/19** 

## 5 (a) Solve 3 cot 2 b^ y r 4 l^ = 1 for 0 1 y 1 r radians. [4] 

## (b) Solve 7 cot z + tan z = 7 cosec z for 0 ° G z G 360 °. [6] 


## ©UCLES 2019 0606/23/O/N/19 [Turn over 

## 6 Do not use a calculator in this question. 

### C 

### A B 

### 3 – 3 

### 3 + 3 

## (i) Find tan ACB in the form r + s 3 , where r and s are integers. [3] 

## (ii) Find AC in the form t u , where t and u are integers and t! 1. [3] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/23/O/N/19** 

## 7 

### O 

 y 

 x 

 x = 2 

### ( ) 

 y x 3 x 

### 6 

### 2 2 

### = + 

### + 

 The diagram shows part of the curve ( ) 

 y x 

 x 3 2 

### 6 

= + (^) + 2 and the line _x_ = 2. 

## (i) Find, correct to 2 decimal places, the coordinates of the stationary point. [6] 


## ©UCLES 2019 0606/23/O/N/19 [Turn over 

## (ii) Find the area of the shaded region, showing all your working. [4] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/23/O/N/19** 

## 8 The roots of the equation x^3 + ax^2 + bx + 24 = 0 are 2, 3 and p , where p is an integer. 

## (i) Find the value of p. [1] 

## (ii) Show that a =1 and find the value of b. [4] 


## ©UCLES 2019 0606/23/O/N/19 [Turn over 

 Given that a curve has equation y = x^3 x^2 + bx + 24 find, using your value of b , 

**(iii)** (^) _x y_ d d , [1] 

## (iv) the integer value of x for which the gradient of the curve is 2 and the corresponding value of y. [3] 

## The coordinates of the point P on the curve are given by the values of x and y found in part (iv). 

## (v) Find the equation of the tangent to the curve at P. [1] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/23/O/N/19** 

## 9 

### B 

_O_ (^) _A C_ 

### D 

### X 

 The diagram shows points O , A , B , C , D and X. The position vectors of A , B , and C relative to O are OA = a , OB = 2 b and OC = 3 a. The vector CD = b. 

## (i) Given that AX = mAD , find OX in terms of m , a and b. [2] 

## (ii) Given that BX = nBC , find OX in terms of n , a and b. [2] 


## ©UCLES 2019 0606/23/O/N/19 [Turn over 

## (iii) Hence find the value of m and of n. [4] 

**(iv)** Find the ratio (^) _XDAX_^. [1] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/23/O/N/19** 

## 10 The functions f and g are defined by 

### ( ) ( ) , 

### ( ). 

 x ln x x 

 x x 

### 3 2 32 

### 4 

 f for 

 g e 2 x for R 

### 2 

### ! 

### = + 

### = 

## (i) Solve gf ( ) x = 5. [5] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/23/O/N/19** 

## (ii) Find f -^1 ( ) x. [2] 

## (iii) Solve f -^1 ( ) x =g( ) x. [4] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/23/O/N/19** 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. 

## BLANK PAGE 


