 This document consists of 16 printed pages. 

 DC (LK/TP) 172296/2 © UCLES 2019 [Turn over 

* 7 2 1 8 1 4 9 8 0 6 * 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/12 Paper 1 October/November 2019 2 hours Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all the questions. Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/12/O/N/19** 

 Mathematical Formulae 

#### 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

_x_ (^) _a b b ac_ 2 

#### !^24 

#### = 

#### 

### . 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( _n_ 

# 1 ) a 

_n_ –1 (^) _b_ + 

# ( 

 n 

# 2 ) a 

_n_ –2 (^) _b_ (^2) + … + 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) a 

_n_ – _r_ (^) _br_ (^) + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( _n_ 

# r ) =^ 

 n! ( n – r )! r! 

#### . 

#### 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ 

 sin^2 A + cos^2 A = 1 

 sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A 

 cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC_ 

 a sin A =^ 

 b sin B =^ 

 c sin C 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

 ∆ = 

 1 2 bc^ sin^ A 


### ©UCLES 2019 0606/12/O/N/19 [Turn over 

**1 (i)** On the axes below, sketch the graph of _y_ = 2 cos 3 _x_ 1 for 90 ° G _x_ G 90 °. 

 y 

 0 x 

#### 1 

#### 1 

#### 2 

#### 3 

#### 4 

#### 2 

#### 3 

#### 4 

#### 90° 60° -30° 30° 60° 90° 

#### [3] 

### (ii) Write down the amplitude of 2 cos 3 x 1. [1] 

 (iii) Write down the period of 2 cos 3 x 1. [1] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/12/O/N/19** 

### 2 When lg y^2 is plotted against x , a straight line is obtained passing through the points (5, 12) and (3, 20). 

 Find y in terms of x , giving your answer in the form y = 10 ax^ +^ b , where a and b are integers. [5] 


### ©UCLES 2019 0606/12/O/N/19 [Turn over 

### 3 The first three terms in the expansion of 1 7^ x^ ( 1 2 x ) 

(^14 4) b l can be written as 1 + _ax_ + _bx_^2. Find the value of each of the constants _a_ and _b_. [6] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/12/O/N/19** 

### 4 (i) On the axes below, sketch the graph of y = 2 x^2 9 x 5 showing the coordinates of the points 

 where the graph meets the axes. [4] 

 y 

 O x 

### (ii) Find the values of k for which 2 x^2 9 x 5 = k has exactly 2 solutions. [3] 


### ©UCLES 2019 0606/12/O/N/19 [Turn over 

## 5 (a) It is given that f : x 7 x for x H 0 , 

## g : x 7 x + 5 for x H 0. 

 Identify each of the following functions with one of f -^1 , g-^1 , fg, gf, f 2 , g^2. 

### (i) x + 5 [1] 

### (ii) x 5 [1] 

### (iii) x^2 [1] 

### (iv) x + 10 [1] 

### (b) It is given that h ( ) x a 

 x 

 b = + 2 where a and b are constants. 

### (i) Why is 2 G x G 2 not a suitable domain for h( x )? [1] 

### (ii) Given that h 1( ) = 4 and h l( ) 1 = 16 , find the value of a and of b. [2] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/12/O/N/19** 

### 6 (a) Write 

 p 

 p qr 

 r 

 qp 

 1 

 2 

- 3 

 a k in the form p q ra^ b^ c^ , where a , b and c are constants. [3] 

### (b) Solve log 7 x + 2 log x 7 = 3. [4] 


### ©UCLES 2019 0606/12/O/N/19 [Turn over 

### 7 It is given that y 1 e x ( x 5 ) 

 2 

### = ^^ + h^ +. 

### (i) Find d 

 d x 

 y 

. [3] 

### (ii) Find the approximate change in y as x increases from 0.5 to 0 5. + p , where p is small. [2] 

### (iii) Given that y is increasing at a rate of 2 units per second when x = 0 5., find the corresponding rate of 

 change in x. [2] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/12/O/N/19** 

### 8 (a) Five teams took part in a competition in which each team played each of the other 4 teams. The 

 following table represents the results after all the matches had been played. 

 Team Won Drawn Lost 

 A 2 1 1 

 B 1 3 0 

 C 1 1 2 

 D 0 1 3 

 E 3 0 1 

 Points in the competition were awarded to the teams as follows 

 4 for each match won, 2 for each match drawn, 0 for each match lost. 

### (i) Write down two matrices whose product under matrix multiplication will give the total number of 

 points awarded to each team. [2] 

### (ii) Evaluate the matrix product from part (i) and hence state which team was awarded the most 

 points. [2] 


### ©UCLES 2019 0606/12/O/N/19 [Turn over 

### (b) It is given that A 

#### 1 

#### 2 

#### 1 

#### 4 

#### = 

#### 

 c m and B 

#### 5 

#### 1 

#### 0 

#### 2 

#### = 

#### 

 c m. 

### (i) Find A -^1. [2] 

### (ii) Hence find the matrix C such that AC = B. [3] 


 ©UCLES 2019 0606/12/O/N/19 

### 9 A solid circular cylinder has a base radius of r cm and a height of h cm. The cylinder has a volume of 

 1200 r cm^3 and a total surface area of S cm^2. 

**(i)** Show that _S_ = 2 r _r_^2 + (^2400) _r_ r. [3] 


### ©UCLES 2019 0606/12/O/N/19 [Turn over 

### (ii) Given that h and r can vary, find the stationary value of S and determine its nature. [5] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/12/O/N/19** 

### 10 

 18 cm 

 18 cm 

#### O 

_A_ (^) _B_ 

#### C 

 10 cm 

 The diagram shows a circle centre O , radius 10 cm. The points A , B and C lie on the circumference of the circle such that AB = BC = 18 cm. 

### (i) Show that angle AOB = 2 24. radians correct to 2 decimal places. [3] 

### (ii) Find the perimeter of the shaded region. [5] 


### ©UCLES 2019 0606/12/O/N/19 [Turn over 

### Continuation of working space for Question 10(ii). 

### (iii) Find the area of the shaded region. [3] 

### Question 11 is printed on the next page. 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/12/O/N/19** 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. 

### 11 A curve is such that ( ) 

 d 

 d x 

 y 2 2 3 x^1 

 2 3 

 2 = 

- 

. Given that the curve has a gradient of 6 at the point (3, 11), find 

 the equation of the curve. [8] 


