 This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. 

 DC (NF/SG) 172320/3 © UCLES 2019 [Turn over 

* 5 1 2 0 0 5 1 4 5 1 * 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

### ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/21 

 Paper 2 October/November 2019 2 hours Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all the questions. Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/21/O/N/19** 

 Mathematical Formulae 

### 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

 x b^ 2 ba^^4 ac 

### !^2 

## = -^ -^. 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( _n_ 

# 1 ) a 

_n_ –1 (^) _b_ + 

# ( 

 n 

# 2 ) a 

_n_ –2 (^) _b_ (^2) + … + 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) a 

_n_ – _r_ (^) _br_ (^) + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( _n_ 

# r ) =^ 

 n! ( n – r )! r! 

### . 

### 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ 

 sin^2 A + cos^2 A = 1 

 sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A 

 cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC_ 

 a sin A =^ 

 b sin B =^ 

 c sin C 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

 ∆ = 

 1 2 bc^ sin^ A 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/21/O/N/19 [Turn over** 

**1 (i)** On the axes below, draw the graph of _y_ = 2 _x_ 3. 

 y 

 0^ x 

### 2 

### 4 

### 6 

### 8 

### 2 

### 2 2 4 

### 4 

### [2] 

 (ii) Solve the equation 7 2 x 3 = 0. [3] 

### 2 

 y 

(^0) _x_ 

### 2 

### 4 

### 6 

 r 2 r 

- 2 

 The figure shows part of the graph of y = p + q cos rx. Find the value of each of the integers p , q and r. 

 p = q = r = 

 [3] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/21/O/N/19** 

**3 (a)** Solve e 2 _x_^^ +^1 = 3 e^4 -^3 _x_. [3] 

 (b) Solve lg ( y 6 ) + lg( y + 15 ) = 2. [5] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/21/O/N/19 [Turn over** 

**4 Do not use a calculator in this question.** 

 Solve the following simultaneous equations, giving your answers for both x and y in the form a + b 2 , where a and b are integers. 

 2 x + y = 5 

 3 x 2 y = 7 [5] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/21/O/N/19** 

**5** A particle is moving in a straight line such that _t_ seconds after passing a fixed point _O_ its displacement, _s_ m, is given by _s_ = 3 sin 2 _t_ + 4 cos 2 _t_ 4. 

 (i) Find expressions for the velocity and acceleration of the particle at time t. [3] 

 (ii) Find the first time when the particle is instantaneously at rest. [3] 

 (iii) Find the acceleration of the particle at the time found in part (ii). [2] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/21/O/N/19 [Turn over** 

**6 Do not use a calculator in this question.** 

 The curve xy = 11 x + 5 cuts the line y = x + 10 at the points A and B. The mid-point of AB is the point C. Show that the point C lies on the line x + y = 11. [7] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/21/O/N/19** 

**7 (a) (i)** Use the factor theorem to show that 2 _x_ 1 is a factor of p ( ) _x_ , where p ( ) _x_ = 4 _x_^3 + 9 _x_ 5. [1] 

 (ii) Write p ( ) x as a product of linear and quadratic factors. [2] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/21/O/N/19 [Turn over** 

 (b) (i) Show that 13 tan x sec x 4 sin x 5 sec^2 x = 0 can be written as 4 sin 3 x^ + 9 sin x 5 = 0. [3] 

 (ii) Using your answers to part (a)(ii) and part (b)(i) solve the equation 

 13 tan x sec x 4 sin x 5 sec^2 x = 0 for 0 1 x 1 2 r radians. [4] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/21/O/N/19** 

**8** The equation of a curve is given by _y_ = _x_ e -^2 _x_. 

**(i)** Find (^) _x y_ d d 

. [3] 

 (ii) Find the exact coordinates of the stationary point on the curve y = x e -^2 x. [2] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/21/O/N/19 [Turn over** 

 (iii) Find, in terms of e, the equation of the tangent to the curve y = x e -^2 x at the point 1 , 1 e 2 

 e o.^ [2] 

**(iv)** Using your answer to **part (i)** , find (^) y _x_ e -^2 _x_ d _x_. [3] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/21/O/N/19** 

**9** Given that **A** 

### 5 

### 9 

### 2 

### 3 

### = 

### 

e o (^) and **B** 

### 2 

### 6 

### 1 

### 5 

 = e^ o, find 

 (i) A -^1 , [2] 

 (ii) B^2 , [2] 

 (iii) the matrix C , where B -^1 C^ + A = B , [3] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/21/O/N/19 [Turn over** 

 (iv) the matrix D , where B -^2 DA^ = I. [3] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/21/O/N/19** 

**10 (i)** Expand ( 3 + _x_ )^4 evaluating each coefficient. [3] 

In the expansion of _x_ (^) _x_ ( ) _p_ b (^) l (^3) + _x_^4 the coefficient of _x_ is zero. **(ii)** Find the value of the constant _p_. [2] **(iii)** Hence find the term independent of _x_. [1] **(iv)** Show that the coefficient of _x_^2 is 90. [2] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/21/O/N/19** 

**11** A plane, which can travel at a speed of 300 km h–1^ in still air, heads due north. The plane is blown off course by a wind so that it travels on a bearing of 010° at a speed of 280 km h –1. 

 (i) Find the speed of the wind. [3] 

 (ii) Find the direction of the wind as a bearing correct to the nearest degree. [3] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/21/O/N/19** 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. 

### BLANK PAGE 


