 This document consists of 10 printed pages. 

© UCLES 2019 **[Turn over** 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

**ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/11** 

Paper 1 **October/November 2019** 

MARK SCHEME 

Maximum Mark: 80 

 Published 

This mark scheme is published as an aid to teachers and candidates, to indicate the requirements of the examination. It shows the basis on which Examiners were instructed to award marks. It does not indicate the details of the discussions that took place at an Examiners’ meeting before marking began, which would have considered the acceptability of alternative answers. 

Mark schemes should be read in conjunction with the question paper and the Principal Examiner Report for Teachers. 

Cambridge International will not enter into discussions about these mark schemes. 

Cambridge International is publishing the mark schemes for the October/November 2019 series for most Cambridge IGCSE™, Cambridge International A and AS Level components and some Cambridge O Level components. 


###### PUBLISHED 

###### 2019 

 Generic Marking Principles 

These general marking principles must be applied by all examiners when marking candidate answers. They should be applied alongside the specific content of the mark scheme or generic level descriptors for a question. Each question paper and mark scheme will also comply with these marking principles. 

###### GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 1: 

 Marks must be awarded in line with: 

- the specific content of the mark scheme or the generic level descriptors for the question 

- the specific skills defined in the mark scheme or in the generic level descriptors for the question 

- the standard of response required by a candidate as exemplified by the standardisation scripts. 

 GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 2: 

 Marks awarded are always whole marks (not half marks, or other fractions). 

 GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 3: 

 Marks must be awarded positively : 

- marks are awarded for correct/valid answers, as defined in the mark scheme. However, credit     is given for valid answers which go beyond the scope of the syllabus and mark scheme,     referring to your Team Leader as appropriate 

- marks are awarded when candidates clearly demonstrate what they know and can do 

- marks are not deducted for errors 

- marks are not deducted for omissions 

- answers should only be judged on the quality of spelling, punctuation and grammar when these     features are specifically assessed by the question as indicated by the mark scheme. The     meaning, however, should be unambiguous. 

 GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 4: 

 Rules must be applied consistently e.g. in situations where candidates have not followed instructions or in the application of generic level descriptors. 

 GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 5: 

 Marks should be awarded using the full range of marks defined in the mark scheme for the question (however; the use of the full mark range may be limited according to the quality of the candidate responses seen). 

 GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 6: 

 Marks awarded are based solely on the requirements as defined in the mark scheme. Marks should not be awarded with grade thresholds or grade descriptors in mind. 


###### PUBLISHED 

###### 2019 

###### MARK SCHEME NOTES 

The following notes are intended to aid interpretation of mark schemes in general, but individual mark schemes may include marks awarded for specific reasons outside the scope of these notes. 

**Types of mark** 

M Method marks, awarded for a valid method applied to the problem. 

A Accuracy mark, awarded for a correct answer or intermediate step correctly obtained. For accuracy marks to be given, the associated Method mark must be earned or implied. 

B Mark for a correct result or statement independent of Method marks. 

When a part of a question has two or more ‘method’ steps, the M marks are in principle independent unless the scheme specifically says otherwise; and similarly where there are several B marks allocated. The notation ‘ **dep** ’ is used to indicate that a particular M or B mark is dependent on an earlier mark in the scheme. 

**Abbreviations** 

awrt answers which round to cao correct answer only dep dependent FT follow through after error isw ignore subsequent working nfww not from wrong working oe or equivalent rot rounded or truncated SC Special Case soi seen or implied 


###### PUBLISHED 

###### 2019 

**Question Answer Marks Guidance** 

(^1) _A_ ′ ∩ _B_ oe **B1** 

## ( X^ ∩^ Y^ ) ∪^ ( X^ ∩ Z^ )or^ X^ ∩^ ( Y^ ∪ Z^ ) B1 

(^2 2) _x_^2 + 3 _x_ + _k_ = _kx_ − 3 **M1** For an attempt to equate and simplify to a 3 term quadratic equation, allow an error in one term 2 _x_^2 + (^) ( 3 − _k_ (^) ) _x_ + (^) ( _k_ + (^3) )= 0 **A1** 

## ( ) ( ) 

 3 − k^2 − 4 × 2 × k + 3 M1^ For attempt to use the discriminant, allow previous error, leading to a quadratic equation in terms of k 

 k^2 − 14 k − 15 = 0 giving critical values of − 1 and 15 

 A1 For critical values 

 − 1 < k < 15 A1 

 3 Either 7 x^ × 72 y^ or 49 2 × 49 

 x 

_y_ (^) or 55 _x_ (^) × 52 _y_ or 5 25 2 × 25 _x y_ **M1** For expressing the terms on the left hand side of either one of the 2 equations in terms of powers of 7, 49, 5 or 25 7 _x_^ × 72 _y_^ = 70 or 49 2 × 49 = 490 _x y_ **A1** 55 _x_^ × 52 _y_^ = 5 −^2 or 5 25 2 × 25 = 25 −^1 _x y_ **A1** leading to _x_ + 2 _y_ = 0 and 5 _x_ + 2 _y_ = − 2 **M1** For attempt to solve two linear equations, with integer coefficients and constants, in terms of _x_ and _y_ 1 1 , 2 4 _x_ = − _y_ = 

###### A1 

 4(i) 

# ( (^2 )) 2 

 d 8 ln 4 1 

d (^4 1) 

###### + = 

###### + 

 x x 

_x_ (^) _x_ 

###### B1 

## ( ) 

## ( ) 

## ( ) 

## ( ) 

 2 2 2 

###### 8 

 2 3 2ln 4 1 d^4 1 

d (^2 3) 

###### − − + 

###### + 

###### = 

###### − 

 x x x y x 

_x_ (^) _x_ **M1** For attempt to differentiate a quotient **A1** For all other terms, not including 2 

###### 8 

###### 4 + 1 

 x x 

 , correct 

 4(ii) When 

 d 16 2, 2ln17 d 17 

###### = = − 

 y x x = − 4.73 

###### M1 

 For attempt to find value of 

 d d 

 y x 

 when 

 x = 2 and multiply by h 

 Change in y = −4.73 h A1 


###### PUBLISHED 

###### 2019 

**Question Answer Marks Guidance** 

 5(i) f > 1 B1 Must be using correct notation 

g ∈ \ (^) **B1** Must be using correct notation 5(ii) (^) g 0( ) = 1, g 1( ) = 2 and attempt at f (^) ( 2 ) **M1** (^) For attempt at g 2 and correct order f (^) ( 2 ) = 164.8awrt 165 **A1** 5(iii) **B3** (^) **B1** for correct f and (^) ( 0, 4) , must be in first and second quadrant **B1** for correct f-1^ and (^) ( 4,0) , must be in first and fourth quadrant **B1** for _y_ = _x_ and/or symmetry implied, by ‘matching intercepts’. No intersection. (^6) d d _y x_ = _k_ (8 _x_ + 5) 1 − (^2) **M1** For attempt to differentiate, must be in the form _k_ (8 _x_ + 5) 1 − 2 d d _y x_ = 4(8 _x_ + 5) 1 − (^2) 

###### A1 

 When x = 

###### 1 

###### 2 

 , y = 3 

###### B1 

 Normal: 

###### 3 1 

###### 3 

###### 4 2 

###### − = − ^ −  

######   

######   

 y x 

###### M1 

 For attempt at the normal when x = 

###### 1 

###### 2 

###### , 

 using correct process for their 

 d d 

 y x 

 and 

 their y. 

 6 x + 8 y – 27 = 0 A1 


###### PUBLISHED 

###### 2019 

**Question Answer Marks Guidance** 

 7(i) lg y = lg A + x lg b B1 For statement, may be implied by subsequent work 

 Either 6 = lg A + 3.4 lg b or 3.6 = lg A + 2.2 lg b 

 M1 For one correct equation 

 M1 For another correct equation and attempt to solve simultaneously 

 lg b = 2, b = 100 A1 

 lg A = –0.8, A = 10 –0.8^ or 0.158 A1 

 Or Gradient = lg b = 2 

 M1 equating gradient to lg b and attempt to evaluate 

 b = 100 A1 Must be identified as b 

 6 = lg A + 3.4 lg b or 3.6 = lg A + 2.2 lg b 

 M1 For a correct equation and attempt to find lg A 

 lg A = –0.8, A = 10 –0.8^ or 0.158 A1 Must be identified as A 

 7(ii) lg 900 = –0.8 + 2 x oe M1 For correct use of y = 900 

 x = 1.88 A1 

 8(i) 

_BC_^2 = (^) ( ) ( ) 2 2 7 + 5 + 7 − 5 = 49 + 14 5 + 5 + 49 – 14 5 + 5 = 108 **M1** For use of Pythagoras’ theorem and attempt to expand and simplify 

###### BC = 6 3 A1 

 Perimeter = 22 + 6 5 + 6 3 A1 


###### PUBLISHED 

###### 2019 

**Question Answer Marks Guidance** 

 8(ii) Either 

## ( )( ) 

###### 1 

###### 4 3 5 11 2 5 7 5 

###### 2 

###### + + + + 

## ( )( ) 

###### 1 

###### 15 5 5 7 5 

###### 2 

###### = + + 

## ( ) 

###### 1 

###### 105 35 5 15 5 25 

###### 2 

###### = + + + 

 M1 Either 

 For a valid method and attempt to expand out and simplify 

 Or 

## ( )( ) ( )( ) 

###### 1 

###### 4 3 5 7 5 7 5 7 5 

###### 2 

###### + + + + − 

###### = 28 + 21 5 + 4 5 + 15 + 

###### 1 

###### 2 

###### (49 – 5) 

 M1 Or 

 For a valid method and attempt to expand out and simplify 

 Area = 65 + 25 5 A2^ A1 for each term 

 9(i) Either 152 = 102 + 102 − 200 cos AOB cos AOB = −0.125 

 M1 For use of cosine rule 

 AOB =1.696so 1.70 to 2 dp A1 Must have justification to 2 dp 

 Or 7.5 sin 2 10 

  (^) =     

###### AOB 

###### 0.8481 

###### 2 

###### = 

###### AOB 

 M1 For use of basic trig 

 AOB =1.696so 1.70 to 2 dp A1 


###### PUBLISHED 

###### 2019 

**Question Answer Marks Guidance** 

 9(ii) Angle 

 π 3 

###### DOC = 

###### B1 

 Either π 0.5 2π 1.696 3 

###### = = ^ − −  

######   

######   

###### AOD BOC 

###### AOD = BOC = 1.77 

 M1 For attempt to get AOD or BOC 

 Arc lengths = 17.7 M1 For attempt at arc length using their previous answer 

##### Perimeter = 15 + 10 + ( 2 ×17.7 ) = 60.4 A1 

 Or 

 Arc AB = 17 or Arc CD = 

 10 π 3 

 M1 For either arc length 

 (20π – arc AB – arc CD ) M1 

 Perimeter = 60.4 A1 

 9(iii) Either 

#### Area of each sector = 2 ( ) 

###### 1 

###### 10 1.770 

###### 2 

 M1 For area of sector using their BOC 

 Area of triangles = 1 π 1 100 sin 100sin1.70 2 3 2 

 (^) × ×  (^) +  (^) ×          **M1** For area of one triangle using the sine rule oe Total area = 177 + 43.3 + 49.6 **M1** For plan Area = awrt 270 **A1 Or** Area of upper segment = (^2) ( ) 

###### 1 

 10 1.696 sin1.696 2 

###### − 

 M1 For area of a sector or area of a triangle using the sine rule oe 

 Area of lower segment = 

1 102 π (^) sinπ 2 3 3  (^) −      **M1** For whichever has not been obtained in previous part Shaded area = 100 π – are of the 2 segments Area = 314.2 – 35.2 – 9.06 **M1** For plan Area = awrt 270 **A1** 


###### PUBLISHED 

###### 2019 

**Question Answer Marks Guidance** 

 10 1.5 = 2 + cos 3 x cos3 x = −0.5 

 M1 For correct attempt to find points of intersection 

 2 π 4 π 3 , 3 3 

 x = 

 M1 For dealing with 3 x correctly 

 2 π 9 

 x = or 40 o 

###### A1 

 4 π 9 

 x = or 80 o 

###### A1 

 Either 

##### ( ) 

 4 π 9 2 π 9 

### ∫ 1.5^ −^2 +cos3^ x^ d x 

 M1 For subtraction method – condone omission of or incorrect limits 

#### [ ] 

 4 π 9 2 π 9 

 −0.5 x − k sin 3 x 

 M1 For attempt to integrate – condone omission of or incorrect limits 

 4 π 9 2 π 9 

###### 1 

 0.5 sin 3 3 

 (^) − −  ^ _x_^ _x_  **A1** All correct – condone omission of or incorrect limits 2 π 3 π 3 9 6 9 6 

######     

######  −^ +^  −^  −^ −  

######     

 M1 Dep for application of limits, must be in radians 

 Area = 

 3 π 3 9 

###### − 

###### A1 

 Or 2 π 1.5 9 

 (^) ×      **M1** For attempt at rectangle (must include subtraction subsequently) 

#### [ ] 

 4 π 9 2 π 9 

 2 x + k sin 3 x 

 M1 For attempt to integrate – condone omission of or incorrect limits 

 4 π 9 2 π 9 

###### 1 

 2 sin 3 3 

 (^) +  ^ _x_^ _x_  **A1** All correct – condone omission of or incorrect limits 8 π 3 4 π 3 9 6 9 6  (^)      (^)  −^  −^  +   (^)     **M1** Dep for application of limits, must be in radians Area = 3 π 3 9 

###### − 

###### A1 


###### PUBLISHED 

###### 2019 

**Question Answer Marks Guidance** 

 11(a)(i) 362 880 B1 

 11(a)(ii) 7!^ ×^2 B1 For 7! 

 10 080 B1 For 7! × 2 leading to 10080 

 11(a)(iii) Total = 4! × 4! × 3!= 3456 B3 B1 for treating as 4 separate units 4! B1 for either number of ways of arranging the maths books amongst themselves 4! or the number of ways of arranging the physics books amongst themselves 3! 

 11(b)(i) 18 564 B1 

 11(b)(ii) Total 3738 B4 B1 4 boys 3150 B1 5 boys 560 B1 6 boys 28 

(^12) d π cos d 3 

###### = ^ +  + 

######   

######   

 y k x c x 

 M1 For attempt to integrate 

 d π 2cos d 3 

###### = − ^ +  + 

######   

######   

 y x c x 

 A1 All correct, condone omission of + c 

 2 π 5 2cos 3 

 = − + c 

 M1 Dep for attempt to find c 

 d π 2cos 4 d 3 

###### = − ^ + + 

######   

######   

 y x x 

###### A1 

#### ( ) 

 π sin 3 

###### = ^ +  + + 

######   

######   

 y p x qx d 

 M1 attempt to integrate a second time to 

 obtain 

 π sin 3 

###### = ^ +  

######   

######   

 y p x 

 π 2sin 4 3 

###### = − ^ + + + 

######   

######   

 y x x d 

 A1 All correct, condone omission of + d 

 5 π 2 π 4 π 2sin 3 3 3 

 = − + + d 

 M1 Dep for attempt to find a second arbitrary constant 

 π π 2sin 4 3 3 3 

###### = − ^ + + + + 

######   

######   

 y x x 

 or 

 π 2sin 4 2.78 3 

###### = − ^ + + + 

######   

######   

 y x x 

###### A1 


