 This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. 

 DC (JM/CB) 165270/2 © UCLES 2019 [Turn over 

* 6 7 1 5 0 4 6 2 1 2 * 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

#### ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/12 

 Paper 1 February/March 2019 2 hours Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all the questions. Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 


© UCLES 2019 0606/12/F/M/19 

### Mathematical Formulae 

### 1. ALGEBRA 

### Quadratic Equation 

### For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

 x b^ b^ ac a 

#### = −^ − 

(^2 4) 2 

### Binomial Theorem 

( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( 

### n 

# 1 ) a 

_n_ –1 (^) _b_ + 

# ( 

### n 

# 2 ) a 

_n_ –2 (^) _b_ (^2) + … + 

# ( 

### n 

# r ) a 

_n_ – _r_ (^) _br_ (^) + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( 

### n 

# r )^ =^ 

### n! 

### ( n – r )! r! 

### 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

### Identities 

### sin^2 A + cos^2 A = 1 

### sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A 

### cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

### Formulae for ∆ ABC 

### a 

### sin A =^ 

### b 

### sin B =^ 

### c 

### sin C 

### a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

### ∆ = 

### 1 

### 2 bc^ sin^ A 


© UCLES 2019 0606/12/F/M/19 **[Turn over** 

**1 (a)** Given that  ={ _x_ : 1 1 _x_ 120 }, 

 A = {multiples of 3}, 

 B = {multiples of 4}, 

 find 

 (i) n (^ A ),^ [1] 

 (ii) n ( A + B ). [1] 

### (b) On the Venn diagram below, draw the sets P , Q and R such that P 1 Q and Q + R =Q. 

####  

#### [2] 

 (c) Using set notation, describe the shaded areas shown in the Venn diagrams below. 

#### S T X^ Y 

#### Z 

####   

#### ...................................................................... ....................................................................... [2] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/12/F/M/19 

**2** On the axes below, sketch the graph of the curve _y_ = 2 _x_^2 5 _x_ 3 , stating the coordinates of any points where the curve meets the coordinate axes. 

 x 

 y 10 

#### –10 

#### –1 0 4 

#### [4] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/12/F/M/19 **[Turn over** 

**3 (i)** Find the first 3 terms in the expansion, in ascending powers of _x_ , of _x_ 3 9 

 6 

### f p. Give the terms in their 

 simplest form. [3] 

 (ii) Hence find the term independent of x in the expansion of x^ x x 

#### 3 

#### 9 

#### 2 

 6 2 

### f -^ p f p.^ [3] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/12/F/M/19 

**4** The polynomial p ( ) _x_ = 2 _x_^3 + _ax_^2 + _bx_ 49 , where _a_ and _b_ are constants. When pl( )^ _x_ is divided by _x_ + 3 there is a remainder of 24. 

 (i) Show that 6 a b = 78. [2] 

 It is given that 2 x 1 is a factor of p ( x ). 

 (ii) Find the value of a and of b. [4] 

 (iii) Write p ( x ) in the form ( 2 x 1 Q) ( ) x , where Q ( x ) is a quadratic factor. [2] 

 (iv) Hence factorise p ( x ) completely. [1] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/12/F/M/19 **[Turn over** 

**5** It is given that log 4 _x_ = _p_ .Giving your answer in its simplest form, find, in terms of _p_ , 

 (i) log 4 ( 16 x ), [2] 

 (ii) log x 

(^4256) 7 

### f p. [2] 

 Using your answers to parts (i) and (ii) , 

 (iii) solve log ( x ) log x 16 256 

#### 4 4 5 

 7 

- f^ p^ = , giving your answer correct to 2 decimal places. [3] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/12/F/M/19 

**6 (a)** Given that **A** 

#### 1 

#### 0 

#### 2 

#### 1 

#### = 

#### 

 e o, B 

#### 1 

#### 2 

#### 3 

#### 4 

#### 5 

#### 1 

#### = 

#### 

## f p and^ C^ =^ `^3 2 0j, write down the matrix products which 

 are possible. You do not need to evaluate your products. [2] 

 (b) It is given that X 

#### 2 

#### 5 

#### 2 

#### 3 

#### = 

 e o and Y 

#### 4 

#### 2 

#### 1 

#### 0 

 = e^ o. 

 (i) Find X -^1. [2] 

 (ii) Hence find the matrix Z such that XZ = Y. [3] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/12/F/M/19 **[Turn over** 

**7 Do not use a calculator in this question.** 

 All lengths in this question are in centimetres. 

#### A B 

#### D C 

#### 2 + 3 5 

#### 10 2 5 

#### 6 + 3 5 

 The diagram shows the trapezium ABCD , where AB = 2 + 3 5 , DC = 6 + 3 5 , AD = 10 2 5 and angle ADC = 90°. 

 (i) Find the area of ABCD , giving your answer in the form a + b 5 , where a and b are integers. [3] 

 (ii) Find cot BCD , giving your answer in the form c + d 5 , where c and d are fractions in their simplest form. [3] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/12/F/M/19 

**8 (a)** 

#### 0 

#### 5 

#### 10 

#### 15 

#### 20 

 v 

 2 4 6 8 10 t 

 The diagram shows the velocity-time graph of a particle P moving in a straight line with velocity v ms-^1 at time t seconds after leaving a fixed point. 

 (i) Write down the value of the acceleration of P when t = 5. [1] 

 (ii) Find the distance travelled by the particle P between t = 0 and t = 10. [2] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/12/F/M/19 **[Turn over** 

 (b) A particle Q moves such that its velocity, v ms-^1 , t seconds after leaving a fixed point, is given by v = 3 sin 2 t 1. 

 (i) Find the speed of Q when t = 712 r. [2] 

 (ii) Find the least value of t for which the acceleration of Q is zero. [3] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/12/F/M/19 

**9** The area of a sector of a circle of radius _r_ cm is 36 cm^2. 

**(i)** Show that the perimeter, _P_ cm, of the sector is such that _P_ = 2 _r_ + (^72) _r_. [3] **(ii)** Hence, given that _r_ can vary, find the stationary value of _P_ and determine its nature. [4] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/12/F/M/19 **[Turn over** 

**10** A curve is such that when _x_ = 0, both _y_ = -5 and _x_ 

 y 10 d 

 d =. Given that x 

 y 4 3 d 

 d 2 e^ x 

 2 = 2 + , find 

 (i) the equation of the curve, [7] 

 (ii) the equation of the normal to the curve at the point where x = 41. [3] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/12/F/M/19 

**11 (a)** Solve sin _x_ cos _x_ = 21 tan _x_ for 0 ° G _x_ G 180°. [3] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/12/F/M/19 

**(b) (i)** Show that sec _i_ (^) cotsin^^ _ii_^ = cos _i_. [3] **(ii)** Hence solve sec 3 _i_ (^) cotsin^33 _ii_ = 21 for 23 r^ G _i_ G^23 r, where _i_ is in radians. [4] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/12/F/M/19 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. 

#### BLANK PAGE 


