 This document consists of 14 printed pages and 2 blank pages. 

 DC (KS/TP) 165271/2 © UCLES 2019 [Turn over 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

* 1 4 3 8 5 0 9 3 7 5 * 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/22 Paper 2 February/March 2019 2 hours Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all the questions. Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 


© UCLES 2019 0606/22/F/M/19 

### Mathematical Formulae 

### 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

### For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

 x 

 b b ac a 

#### = 

#### − 2 − 4 

#### 2 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( _n_ 

# 1 ) a 

_n_ –1 (^) _b_ + 

# ( 

 n 

# 2 ) a 

_n_ –2 (^) _b_ (^2) + … + 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) a 

_n_ – _r_ (^) _br_ (^) + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( _n_ 

# r ) =^ 

### n! 

### ( n – r )! r! 

### 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ 

### sin^2 A + cos^2 A = 1 

### sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A 

### cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

### Formulae for ∆ ABC 

 a 

### sin A =^ 

 b 

### sin B =^ 

 c 

### sin C 

### a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

### ∆ = 

### 1 

### 2 bc^ sin^ A 


© UCLES 2019 0606/22/F/M/19 **[Turn over** 

**1** A band can play 25 different pieces of music. From these pieces of music, 8 are to be selected for a concert. 

 (i) Find the number of different ways this can be done. [1] 

 The 8 pieces of music are then arranged in order. 

 (ii) Find the number of different arrangements possible. [1] 

 The band has 15 members. Three members are chosen at random to be the treasurer, secretary and agent. 

 (iii) Find the number of ways in which this can be done. [1] 

**2** Variables _x_ and _y_ are related by the equation _y x_ e 

 ln 

= (^) _x_. **(i)** Show that ln. _y x_ (^) _x x x_ d d e l = (^) _x_ (^) [4] **(ii)** Hence find the approximate change in _y_ as _x_ increases from 2 to 2 + _h_ , where _h_ is small. [2] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/22/F/M/19 

**3** The function f is defined, for 0 c G _x_ G 360 c, by f ( ) _x_ = _a_ + _b_ sin _cx_ , where _a_ , _b_ and _c_ are constants with _b_ 2 0 and _c_ 2 0. The graph of _y_ = f( ) _x_ meets the _y_ -axis at the point (0, 1), has a period of 120° and an amplitude of 5. 

 (i) Sketch the graph of y = f( ) x on the axes below. [3] 

#### 0° 60° 120°^ 180°^ 240°^ 300°^ 360° 

#### 6 

#### – 6 

 y 

 x 

#### 0 

 (ii) Write down the value of each of the constants a , b and c. [2] 

 a = ..................................... b = ..................................... c = ..................................... 


© UCLES 2019 0606/22/F/M/19 **[Turn over** 

**4 (a)** Find the values of _x_ for which 2 _x_ 1 3 _x_ 4. 

 2  + j G + [3] 

 (b) Show that, whatever the value of k , the equation x 4^ kx k 1 0 

(^2 2) + + + = has no real roots. [3] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/22/F/M/19 

**5 Solutions to this question by accurate drawing will not be accepted.** 

 The points A (3, 2), B (7, 4), C (2, 3) and D ( k , 3) are such that CD is perpendicular to AB. Find the equation of the perpendicular bisector of CD. [6] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/22/F/M/19 **[Turn over** 

**6** The relationship between experimental values of two variables, _x_ and _y_ , is given by _y_ = _Abx_ , where _A_ and _b_ are constants. 

 (i) Transform the relationship y = Abx into straight line form. [2] 

 The diagram shows ln y plotted against x for ten different pairs of values of x and y. The line of best fit has been drawn. 

#### 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 

 0 1 2 3 4 x 

 ln y 

 (ii) Find the equation of the line of best fit and the value, correct to 1 significant figure, of A and of b. [4] 

 (iii) Find the value, correct to 1 significant figure, of y when x = 2.7. [2] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/22/F/M/19 

**7 (i)** Given that _y_ = _x x_^2 + 1 , show that (^) _x y x ax b_ d 1 d 2 _p_ 2 = + 

#### + 

  j 

 , where a , b and p are positive constants. [4] 

 (ii) Explain why the graph of y = x x^2 + 1 has no stationary points. [2] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/22/F/M/19 **[Turn over** 

**8** Relative to an origin _O_ , the position vectors of the points _A_ and _B_ are 2 **i** + 12 **j** and 6 **i** 4 **j** respectively. 

 (i) Write down and simplify an expression for AB. [2] 

 The point C lies on AB such that AC : CB is 1 : 3. 

 (ii) Find the unit vector in the direction of OC. [4] 

 The point D lies on OA such that OD : DA is 1 : m. 

 (iii) Find an expression for AD in terms of m , i and j. [2] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/22/F/M/19 

**9 (a)** It is given that g ( ) _x_ = 6 _x_ 4 + 5 for all real _x_. 

 (i) Explain why g is a function but does not have an inverse. [2] 

 (ii) Find g^2 ( ) x and state its domain. [2] 

 It is given that h ( ) x = 6 x 4 + 5 for x G k. 

 (iii) State the greatest value of k such that h-^1 exists. [1] 

 (iv) For this value of k , find h-^1 ( x ). [3] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/22/F/M/19 **[Turn over** 

 (b) The function p is defined by p ( ) x = 3 e x + 2 for all real x. 

 (i) State the range of p. [1] 

 (ii) On the axes below, sketch and label the graphs of y = p( ) x and y = p -^1 ( ) x. State the coordinates of any points of intersection with the coordinate axes. [3] 

 y 

 O x 

 y = x 

 (iii) Hence explain why the equation p ( ) x = p -^1 ( ) x has no solutions. [1] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/22/F/M/19 

#### 10 

 y 

 O D x 

#### A 

#### B 

#### C 

 y = 1 + x + 5 x 

 y 3 x = 3 

 The diagram shows the curve y = 1 + x + 5 x and the straight line y 3 x = 3. The curve and line intersect at the points A and B. The lines BC and AD are perpendicular to the x -axis. 

 (i) Using the substitution u^2 = x , or otherwise, find the coordinates of A and of B. You must show all your working. [6] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/22/F/M/19 **[Turn over** 

 (ii) Find the area of the shaded region, showing all your working. [6] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/22/F/M/19 

**11 (a)** Find 

#### ( ) 

#### . 

 x 

 x x x 

#### 1 

 6 d 

(^2 6) + 

## y [3] 

**(b) (i)** Find (^) y cos 4( _i_ 5 d) _i_. [2] **(ii)** Hence evaluate cos 4( 5 d). 1 25. 2 

## y^ i^ i [2] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/22/F/M/19 

#### BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2019 0606/22/F/M/19 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. 

#### BLANK PAGE 


