 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 16 printed pages. 

 IB16 11_0610_13/5RP © UCLES 2016 [Turn over 

# *5967824525* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## BIOLOGY 0610/13 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) October/November 2016 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2016 0610/13/O/N/16 

**1** Breathing out combines which two characteristics of living organisms? 

 A excretion and movement 

 B excretion and respiration 

 C movement and sensitivity 

 D sensitivity and respiration 

**2** Scientists discover a new species of animal. 

 It has a segmented body with two pairs of legs on each segment. 

 To which group of animals does this new species belong? 

 A arachnids 

 B crustaceans 

 C insects 

 D myriapods 

**3** The diagram shows an insect. 

 Use the key to identify the insect. 

 1 wings present ........................................... go to 2 

 wings absent ............................................ A 

 2 two pairs of wings ..................................... go to 3 

 one pair of wings ...................................... B 

 3 wings with circular markings ..................... C 

 wings without circular markings ................ D 

**4** Which feature shows that a cell is a plant cell? 

 A cell membrane 

 B cell wall 

 C cytoplasm 

 D nucleus 


© UCLES 2016 0610/13/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**5** A student drew a large diagram of a leaf as shown. 

 drawing measured 160 mm 

 The drawing measured 160 mm. 

 The teacher noted that the diagram was twice the size of the leaf. 

 What was the actual size of the leaf? 

 A 2 mm B 16 mm C 80 mm D 180 mm 

**6** The diagram shows a plant cell which has lost water to its surroundings by osmosis. 

 Which part is the partially permeable membrane? 

 A 

## B 

## C 

## D 

**7** Which identifies the chemical elements found in proteins? 

 carbon hydrogen oxygen nitrogen 

 A     key 

 B     = present 

 C     = absent 

 D     


© UCLES 2016 0610/13/O/N/16 

**8** The graph shows how the activity of an enzyme varies with temperature. 

 rate of enzyme activity 

 temperature / °C 

## 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 

 What is the best or optimum temperature for this enzyme and at what temperature is the enzyme not working? 

 temperature / °C 

 best not working 

 A 30 0 

 B 30 60 

 C 50 0 

 D 50 60 

**9** Where are carbohydrates made in a green leaf? 

 A cell vacuoles 

 B chloroplasts 

 C phloem 

 D xylem 


© UCLES 2016 0610/13/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**10** The diagram shows a leaf as seen in cross section under the microscope. 

## 1 

## 2 

## 3 

 What are tissues 1, 2 and 3? 

## 1 2 3 

 A epidermis palisade mesophyll spongy mesophyll 

 B epidermis spongy mesophyll palisade mesophyll 

 C palisade mesophyll epidermis spongy mesophyll 

 D spongy mesophyll palisade mesophyll epidermis 

**11** The roots of plants take up nitrates from the soil. 

 What are the nitrates used to make? 

 A fat 

 B glucose 

 C protein 

 D starch 

**12** A child decided to eat only meat, oily fish, cheese and bread, and drink only water. 

 Which nutrient would be in low levels in this diet? 

 A calcium 

 B iron 

 C vitamin C 

 D vitamin D 


© UCLES 2016 0610/13/O/N/16 

**13** What is the correct order of the processes that take place in the alimentary canal? 

 A absorption, digestion, ingestion, egestion 

 B digestion, ingestion, egestion, absorption 

 C egestion, digestion, absorption, ingestion 

 D ingestion, digestion, absorption, egestion 

**14** The diagram shows part of the human alimentary canal. 

 Which organ produces hydrochloric acid? 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 

**15** The diagram shows the stem of a plant. A strip of the outer tissue including the phloem has been removed. 

 xylem 

 phloem 

 How is transport in the plant affected? 

 A Amino acids and sugar cannot pass to the roots. 

 B Dissolved salts cannot pass to the leaves. 

 C Water cannot pass to the leaves. 

 D Water cannot pass to the roots. 


© UCLES 2016 0610/13/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**16** After passing through the root hair cells of a plant, what is the next tissue through which water passes? 

 A cortex 

 B epidermis 

 C mesophyll 

 D xylem 

**17** The diagram shows part of a cross section through a leaf. 

 Which arrow shows the direction of movement of water by osmosis in a leaf? 

 leaf cells 

## C 

## B 

## D 

 air space 

## A 

 xylem vessel 

**18** The graph shows the effect of several minutes of vigorous exercise on heart rate. 

 When does the person stop doing this exercise? 

 heart rate 

## 0 

 time / min 

## A 

## C 

## D 

## B 

## 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 


© UCLES 2016 0610/13/O/N/16 

**19** The aorta takes 

 A deoxygenated blood away from the heart. 

 B deoxygenated blood towards the heart. 

 C oxygenated blood away from the heart. 

 D oxygenated blood towards the heart. 

**20** The diagram shows human blood cells, as seen under a microscope. 

 X 

 What is the function of cell X? 

 A to carry glucose 

 B to carry oxygen 

 C to defend against disease 

 D to make the blood clot 

**21** What are disease-causing organisms? 

 A antibodies 

 B pathogens 

 C phagocytes 

 D vaccines 


© UCLES 2016 0610/13/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**22** A student blows through a straw into limewater. 

 limewater 

 straw 

 What is the appearance of the limewater before and after blowing through the straw? 

 before after 

 A blue purple 

 B brown blue-black 

 C colourless white 

 D orange yellow 

**23** What is correct for aerobic respiration in muscles? 

 nutrient molecule 

 oxygen used? 

 A glucose no 

 B glucose yes 

 C lactic acid no 

 D glycogen yes 

**24** To show that a green plant may absorb oxygen, in which condition must it be placed and why? 

 condition reason 

 A dark to prevent photosynthesis 

 B dark to prevent respiration 

 C light to allow photosynthesis 

 D light to allow respiration 


© UCLES 2016 0610/13/O/N/16 

**25** After a meal containing large amounts of meat, urine is likely to contain 

 A a decreased concentration of amino acids. 

 B an increased amount of fat. 

 C an increased concentration of protein. 

 D an increased concentration of urea. 

**26** Which of these neurones is found in the peripheral nervous system? 

 motor sensory 

 A ^  B ^  

 C ^  

 D ^  


© UCLES 2016 0610/13/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**27** The diagram shows seedlings in two experiments on the tropic response of seedlings to gravity and light. 

shoot (^) shoot start of experiment in the dark 3 days later shoot shoot start of experiment 3 days later light from one side to show the effect of gravity to show the effect of light Experiment 1 Experiment 2 How have the seedlings responded? to gravity to light **A**   key **B**   = tropic response shown **C**   = no tropic response shown **D**   **28** When does fertilisation occur in humans? **A** when an egg is released **B** when implantation occurs **C** when sperm and egg nuclei fuse **D** when sperm are released 


© UCLES 2016 0610/13/O/N/16 

**29** The diagram shows a flower cut in half. 

 Which structure receives pollen grains during pollination? 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 

**30** The diagrams show four methods of birth control. 

 Which one is placed in the uterus? 

 A B C D 

MON (^) TUE WED (^) THU (^) FRI (^) SAT (^) SUN SUN (^) SAT FRI (^) THU (^) WED TUEMON SUN (^) SAT FRI (^) THU (^) WED TUE MON MON (^) TUE WED (^) THU (^) FRI (^) SAT WHEN THIS PACK IS EMPTY START A NEW ONE IMMEDIATELY^ SUN O R A L (^) C O N T R A C E P T I V E (^) T A B L E T S MON TUE WED THU FRI (^) SAT SUN SUN SAT (^) FRI THU WED TUE MON SUN SAT FRI (^) THU WED TUE MON MON TUE WED THU FRI SAT SUN WHEN THIS PACK IS EMPTY START A NEW ONE IMMEDIATELY O R A L C O N T R A C E P T I V E T A B L E T S **31** What is defined as ‘a thread-like structure of DNA, carrying genetic information in the form of genes’? **A** allele **B** chromosome **C** protein **D** zygote 


© UCLES 2016 0610/13/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**32** What is a function of meiosis? 

 A asexual reproduction 

 B producing cells for growth 

 C producing genetically different cells 

 D repairing tissues 

**33** In mice, the allele for black hair is dominant to the allele for brown hair. 

 What proportion of offspring will have black hair if a cross is made between a homozygous black mouse and a heterozygous black mouse? 

 A 0% B 25% C 50% D 100% 

**34** Which of these human characteristics shows continuous variation? 

 A free or attached earlobes 

 B sex 

 C tongue rolling 

 D weight 

**35** The diagram shows the flow of energy through an ecosystem. 

 decomposers 

 sunlight producers X 

 What does X represent? 

 A carbon dioxide and water 

 B carnivores 

 C consumers 

 D oxygen 


© UCLES 2016 0610/13/O/N/16 

**36** A herd of red deer live in a woodland, which contains snakes and a large variety of birds. 

 Which group of organisms is an example of a population? 

 A all the animals in the wood 

 B all the red deer in the wood 

 C all the organisms in the wood 

 D all the plants in the wood 

**37** What is **not** a reason that bacteria are widely used in biotechnology? 

 A They are complex organisms. 

 B They are made of single cells. 

 C They are small. 

 D They reproduce quickly. 

**38** The diagram shows how ethanol can be produced from a sugar solution containing yeast. 

 After five hours the mixture produced bubbles. 

 air lock 

 sugar solution containing yeast 

 bubbles 

 What is the main gas in the bubbles? 

 A air 

 B carbon dioxide 

 C methane 

 D oxygen 


© UCLES 2016 0610/13/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**39** The diagram shows part of a food web. 

 plankton 

 blue whale 

 small crustaceans 

 large fish 

 small fish penguin 

 seal 

 Fishermen regularly catch and remove large fish. 

 What is most likely to happen to the populations of penguins, small fish and seals? 

 penguins small fish seal 

 A decrease increase increase 

 B increase decrease decrease 

 C increase increase increase 

 D no change decrease decrease 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2016 0610/13/O/N/16 

**40** The diagram shows the results of a survey on the types of animals found along a stretch of river near to a factory. 

 rat-tailed maggot sludge worm bloodworm 

 mayfly nymph stonefly nymph 

 mayfly nymph stonefly nymph 

 shrimp caddisfly larva 

 bloodworm leech water louse snail 

 factory emptying pollutants into the water 

 direction of water flow 

 Which of the following animals lives in the most polluted water? 

 A bloodworm 

 B caddisfly larva 

 C leech 

 D stonefly nymph 


