 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 14 printed pages and 2 blank pages. 

 IB16 11_0610_22/5RP © UCLES 2016 [Turn over 

# *8402847547* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## BIOLOGY 0610/22 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) October/November 2016 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A, B, C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2016 0610/22/O/N/16 

1 Which characteristic of living organisms is responsible for the production of oxygen in the leaf of a plant exposed to sunlight? 

 A excretion 

 B movement 

 C nutrition 

 D respiration 

2 The scientific name for humans is Homo sapiens. 

 What does Homo refer to? 

 A arthropod 

 B genus 

 C kingdom 

 D species 

3 The diagram shows an insect. 

 Use the key to identify the insect. 

 1 wings present ........................................... go to 2 

 wings absent ............................................ A 

 2 two pairs of wings ..................................... go to 3 

 one pair of wings ...................................... B 

 3 wings with circular markings ..................... C 

 wings without circular markings ................ D 


© UCLES 2016 0610/22/O/N/16 [Turn over 

4 Which diagram represents a typical plant cell? 

 A B C D 

5 A student draws a diagram of a mitochondrion. 

 The diagram has a magnification of × 20 000. 

 The diagram is 5 cm long. 

 What is the actual size of the mitochondrion? 

 A 0.00025 μm B 0.0025 μm C 0.025 μm D 2.5 μm 

6 The diagram shows a plant cell which has lost water to its surroundings by osmosis. 

 Which part is the partially permeable membrane? 

 A 

## B 

## C 

## D 

7 What would lead to a decrease in diffusion rate into a cell? 

 A greater concentration gradient 

 B higher temperature 

 C larger surface area of cell 

 D thicker cell wall 


© UCLES 2016 0610/22/O/N/16 

8 The graph shows the effect of temperature on an enzyme-controlled reaction. 

 rate of reaction 

## 0 20 

 temperature / °C 

## 40 60 

 Which statement describes the effect of temperature on this reaction? 

 A As the temperature increases to 25 °C the reaction speeds up. 

 B Between 10 °C and 20 °C the enzyme stops working. 

 C Between 35 °C and 45 °C the enzyme stops working. 

 D The optimum temperature for this reaction is 40 °C. 

9 Curve X on the graph shows the effect of light intensity on the rate of photosynthesis. 

 rate of photosynthesis 

 light intensity 

## Y 

## X 

 How have the conditions changed to produce curve Y? 

 A decreased concentration of carbon dioxide 

 B decreased light intensity 

 C increased concentration of carbon dioxide 

 D increased light intensity 


© UCLES 2016 0610/22/O/N/16 [Turn over 

10 An experiment is set up to investigate gas exchange in aquatic plants. 

 black paper 

 aquatic plant 

 hydrogencarbonate indicator solution 

 The hydrogencarbonate indicator solution is orange at the start. 

 Which colour is it after three hours? 

 A blue-black 

 B orange 

 C purple 

 D yellow 

11 The roots of plants take up nitrates from the soil. 

 What are the nitrates used to make? 

 A fat 

 B glucose 

 C protein 

 D starch 

12 What is the main cause of kwashiorkor? 

 insufficient energy 

 insufficient protein 

 A   

 B   

 C   

 D   


© UCLES 2016 0610/22/O/N/16 

13 What functions are carried out by the small intestine? 

 absorption of digested food 

 absorption of water 

 ingestion 

## A    

## B    

## C    

## D    

14 The graph shows the effect of pH on the activity of a human digestive enzyme. 

## 0 1 2 3 4 

 pH 

 rate of reaction 

 What is the enzyme? 

 A amylase 

 B maltase 

 C pepsin 

 D trypsin 


© UCLES 2016 0610/22/O/N/16 [Turn over 

15 The diagram shows the stem of a plant. A strip of the outer tissue including the phloem has been removed. 

 xylem 

 phloem 

 How is transport in the plant affected? 

 A Amino acids and sugar cannot pass to the roots. 

 B Dissolved salts cannot pass to the leaves. 

 C Water cannot pass to the leaves. 

 D Water cannot pass to the roots. 

16 A plant shoot is placed in a solution of a dye. 

 The dye moves up the stem. 

 Under which conditions will the dye move slowest? 

 temperature humidity 

 A high high 

 B high low 

 C low high 

 D low low 

17 Which substance is moved by translocation in a flowering plant? 

 A amino acid 

 B cellulose 

 C fat 

 D starch 


© UCLES 2016 0610/22/O/N/16 

18 The diagram shows a section through the heart. 

 Which is an atrioventricular valve in the right side of the heart? 

## A 

## D 

## B 

## C 

19 What is a correct function of the lymphatic system? 

 A protects body from heat loss 

 B protects body from infection 

 C transports blood to lymph nodes 

 D transports urea to the kidneys 

20 The diagram shows human blood cells, as seen under a microscope. 

 X 

 What is the function of cell X? 

 A to carry glucose 

 B to carry oxygen 

 C to defend against disease 

 D to make the blood clot 


© UCLES 2016 0610/22/O/N/16 [Turn over 

21 Which change occurs during blood clotting? 

 A fibrinogen to fibrin 

 B glucose to glycogen 

 C haemoglobin to oxyhaemoglobin 

 D maltose to glucose 

22 How does passive immunity differ from active immunity? In passive immunity 

 A antibodies are produced by lymphocytes. 

 B immunity depends on vaccination. 

 C immunity is specific to one type of antigen. 

 D no memory cells are produced. 

23 After a race, athletes experience oxygen debt. 

 The diagram shows how the oxygen debt is removed. 

 lactic acid forms in the muscles 

 lactic acid moves in the blood to the liver 

 deep breathing continues, supplying extra oxygen 

## X 

 What happens at X? 

 A aerobic respiration of glucose 

 B aerobic respiration of lactic acid 

 C anaerobic respiration of glucose 

 D anaerobic respiration of lactic acid 

24 What is the equation for anaerobic respiration in yeast? 

 A C 6 H 12 O 6 + 6O 2 → 6CO 2 + 6H 2 O 

 B C 6 H 12 O 6 → 2C 3 H 6 O 3 

 C C 6 H 12 O 6 → 2C 2 H 5 OH + 2CO 2 

 D 6CO 2 + 6H 2 O → C 6 H 12 O 6 + 6O 2 


© UCLES 2016 0610/22/O/N/16 

25 In a kidney tubule, which substances are filtered out of the blood in the glomerulus? 

 A glucose, protein, salts and water 

 B glucose, protein, urea and water 

 C glucose, salts, urea and water 

 D protein, salts, urea and water 

26 When the blood glucose concentration is low, which hormone is released and which organ releases it? 

 hormone organ 

 A glucagon liver 

 B glucagon pancreas 

 C insulin liver 

 D insulin pancreas 


© UCLES 2016 0610/22/O/N/16 [Turn over 

27 The diagram shows seedlings in two experiments on the tropic response of seedlings to gravity and light. 

shoot (^) shoot start of experiment in the dark 3 days later shoot shoot start of experiment 3 days later light from one side to show the effect of gravity to show the effect of light Experiment 1 Experiment 2 How have the seedlings responded? to gravity to light A   key B   = tropic response shown C   = no tropic response shown D   28 When does fertilisation occur in humans? A when an egg is released B when implantation occurs C when sperm and egg nuclei fuse D when sperm are released 


© UCLES 2016 0610/22/O/N/16 

29 What describes the nuclei in human reproduction? 

 egg sperm zygote 

 A diploid diploid diploid 

 B diploid diploid haploid 

 C haploid haploid diploid 

 D haploid haploid haploid 

30 Which feature allows the sperm to dissolve the jelly coating of the egg cell? 

 A acrosome 

 B flagellum 

 C mitochondria 

 D nucleus 

31 The graph shows a hormone that is involved in controlling the human female menstrual cycle. 

 concentration of hormone 

## 0 14 28 

 time / days 

 Which hormone is shown by the curve? 

 A FSH 

 B LH 

 C oestrogen 

 D progesterone 

32 Which combination of chromosomes from egg and sperm cells will produce a boy? 

 egg sperm 

 A X X 

 B X Y 

 C Y X 

 D Y Y 


© UCLES 2016 0610/22/O/N/16 [Turn over 

33 What happens in meiosis? 

 genetically identical cells produced 

 chromosome number is halved 

 A   

 B   

 C   

 D   

34 What is the inheritance of colour blindness an example of? 

 A co-dominance 

 B continuous variation 

 C reduction division 

 D sex linkage 

35 The phenotype of an organism is its 

 A combination of alleles. 

 B family pedigree. 

 C genetic make-up. 

 D observable features. 

36 Which is an adaptive feature of hydrophytes? 

 A large network of roots 

 B leaves covered with spines 

 C stomata on the upper surface of the leaves 

 D water storage in stem 

37 Which structures, found in bacteria, make them useful in genetic engineering? 

 A cell walls 

 B membranes 

 C plasmids 

 D mitochondria 


© UCLES 2016 0610/22/O/N/16 

38 Why is yeast used in bread-making? 

 A Aerobic respiration produces alcohol. 

 B Aerobic respiration produces lactic acid. 

 C Anaerobic respiration produces alcohol. 

 D Anaerobic respiration produces carbon dioxide. 

39 An advantage of some genetically modified crop plants is that they will not 

 A be affected by herbicides. 

 B need carbon dioxide. 

 C need magnesium ions. 

 D need water. 

40 When raw sewage is discharged into a stream, what is a result of eutrophication? 

 A decreased oxygen concentration caused by decreased bacterial activity 

 B decreased oxygen concentration caused by increased bacterial activity 

 C increased oxygen concentration caused by decreased bacterial activity 

 D increased oxygen concentration caused by increased bacterial activity 


## BLANK PAGE 

© UCLES 2016 0610/22/O/N/16 


## BLANK PAGE 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2016 0610/22/O/N/16 


