 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. 

 IB16 11_0610_12/4RP © UCLES 2016 [Turn over 

# *3656500760* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## BIOLOGY 0610/12 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) October/November 2016 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2016 0610/12/O/N/16 

**1** Which characteristic of living organisms is responsible for the production of oxygen in the leaf of a plant exposed to sunlight? 

 A excretion 

 B movement 

 C nutrition 

 D respiration 

**2** The scientific name for humans is _Homo sapiens._ 

 What does Homo refer to? 

 A arthropod 

 B genus 

 C kingdom 

 D species 

**3** The diagram shows an insect. 

 Use the key to identify the insect. 

 1 wings present ........................................... go to 2 

 wings absent ............................................ A 

 2 two pairs of wings ..................................... go to 3 

 one pair of wings ...................................... B 

 3 wings with circular markings ..................... C 

 wings without circular markings ................ D 


© UCLES 2016 0610/12/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**4** Which diagram represents a typical plant cell? 

 A B C D 

**5** What is **not** an organ? 

 A aorta 

 B liver 

 C neurone 

 D skin 

**6** The diagram shows a plant cell which has lost water to its surroundings by osmosis. 

 Which part is the partially permeable membrane? 

 A 

## B 

## C 

## D 

**7** Which identifies the chemical elements found in proteins? 

 carbon hydrogen oxygen nitrogen 

 A     key 

 B     = present 

 C     = absent 

 D     


© UCLES 2016 0610/12/O/N/16 

**8** The graph shows the effect of temperature on an enzyme-controlled reaction. 

 rate of reaction 

## 0 20 

 temperature / °C 

## 40 60 

 Which statement describes the effect of temperature on this reaction? 

 A As the temperature increases to 25 °C the reaction speeds up. 

 B Between 10 °C and 20 °C the enzyme stops working. 

 C Between 35 °C and 45 °C the enzyme stops working. 

 D The optimum temperature for this reaction is 40 °C. 

**9** Where are carbohydrates made in a green leaf? 

 A cell vacuoles 

 B chloroplasts 

 C phloem 

 D xylem 


© UCLES 2016 0610/12/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**10** The diagram shows part of a leaf as seen in cross section under the microscope. 

## 1 

## 2 

## 3 

 What are the names of regions 1, 2 and 3? 

 region 

 1 2 3 

 A palisade mesophyll vascular bundle spongy mesophyll 

 B spongy mesophyll palisade mesophyll vascular bundle 

 C vascular bundle palisade mesophyll spongy mesophyll 

 D vascular bundle spongy mesophyll palisade mesophyll 

**11** The roots of plants take up nitrates from the soil. 

 What are the nitrates used to make? 

 A fat 

 B glucose 

 C protein 

 D starch 

**12** A child decided to eat only meat, oily fish, cheese and bread, and drink only water. 

 Which nutrient would be in low levels in this diet? 

 A calcium 

 B iron 

 C vitamin C 

 D vitamin D 


© UCLES 2016 0610/12/O/N/16 

**13** What functions are carried out by the small intestine? 

 absorption of digested food 

 absorption of water ingestion 

 A    

 B    

 C    

 D    

**14** The diagram shows part of the human alimentary canal and associated organs. 

 Where does amylase act on food? 

## D 

## C 

## B 

## A 


© UCLES 2016 0610/12/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**15** The diagram shows the stem of a plant. A strip of the outer tissue including the phloem has been removed. 

 xylem 

 phloem 

 How is transport in the plant affected? 

 A Amino acids and sugar cannot pass to the roots. 

 B Dissolved salts cannot pass to the leaves. 

 C Water cannot pass to the leaves. 

 D Water cannot pass to the roots. 

**16** A plant shoot is placed in a solution of a dye. 

 The dye moves up the stem. 

 Under which conditions will the dye move slowest? 

 temperature humidity 

 A high high 

 B high low 

 C low high 

 D low low 

**17** Which process releases water vapour into the atmosphere from the leaves of trees? 

 A active transport 

 B osmosis 

 C respiration 

 D transpiration 


© UCLES 2016 0610/12/O/N/16 

**18** Which blood vessel carries blood to the muscle of the heart? 

 A coronary artery 

 B pulmonary artery 

 C renal vein 

 D vena cava 

**19** Which chamber of the heart receives blood directly from the pulmonary vein? 

## C 

## A B 

## D 

**20** The diagram shows human blood cells, as seen under a microscope. 

 X 

 What is the function of cell X? 

 A to carry glucose 

 B to carry oxygen 

 C to defend against disease 

 D to make the blood clot 


© UCLES 2016 0610/12/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**21** What is a chemical barrier to pathogens? 

 A nose hairs 

 B skin 

 C stomach acid 

 D white blood cells 

**22** The diagram shows the breathing system. 

## 1 

## 2 

## 3 

 What are the labelled structures? 

## 1 2 3 

 A bronchus diaphragm trachea 

 B diaphragm bronchus trachea 

 C trachea bronchus diaphragm 

 D trachea diaphragm bronchus 

**23** The equations represent chemical reactions that take place in living organisms. 

 Which reaction releases the greatest amount of energy? 

 A carbon dioxide + water → glucose + oxygen 

 B glucose + oxygen → carbon dioxide + water 

 C glucose → alcohol + carbon dioxide 

 D glucose → lactic acid 


© UCLES 2016 0610/12/O/N/16 

**24** Where is urea made and where is it removed? 

 made removed 

 A kidney bladder 

 B kidney kidney 

 C liver kidney 

 D liver rectum 

**25** In reflexes, which term describes light, heat and sound? 

 A effectors 

 B impulses 

 C receptors 

 D stimuli 

**26** What is a function of the cornea? 

 A carries impulses to the brain 

 B controls how much light enters the eye 

 C detects light 

 D refracts light 


© UCLES 2016 0610/12/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**27** The diagram shows seedlings in two experiments on the tropic response of seedlings to gravity and light. 

shoot (^) shoot start of experiment in the dark 3 days later shoot shoot start of experiment 3 days later light from one side to show the effect of gravity to show the effect of light Experiment 1 Experiment 2 How have the seedlings responded? to gravity to light **A**   key **B**   = tropic response shown **C**   = no tropic response shown **D**   **28** When does fertilisation occur in humans? **A** when an egg is released **B** when implantation occurs **C** when sperm and egg nuclei fuse **D** when sperm are released **29** Pollination is the transfer of pollen grains from **A** anther to ovary. **B** anther to stigma. **C** stigma to ovary. **D** stigma to ovule. 


© UCLES 2016 0610/12/O/N/16 

**30** The diagrams show four methods of birth control. 

 Which one is placed in the uterus? 

 A B C D 

MON (^) TUE WED (^) THU (^) FRI (^) SAT (^) SUN SUN (^) SAT FRI (^) THU WED TUEMON SUN (^) SAT FRI (^) THU WED TUE MON MON (^) TUE WED (^) THU (^) FRI (^) SAT WHEN THIS PACK IS EMPTY START A NEW ONE IMMEDIATELY^ SUN O R A L (^) C O N T R A C E P T I V E (^) T A B L E T S MON TUE WED THU FRI (^) SAT SUN SUN SAT (^) FRI THU WED TUE MON SUN SAT FRI THU WED TUE MON MON TUE WED THU FRI (^) SAT SUN WHEN THIS PACK IS EMPTY START A NEW ONE IMMEDIATELY O R A L C O N T R A C E P T I V E T A B L E T S **31** Which method of birth control can protect a person from sexually transmitted infections? **A** chemical implant **B** condom **C** female sterilisation **D** IUD **32** Which combination of chromosomes from egg and sperm cells will produce a boy? egg sperm **A** X X **B** X Y **C** Y X **D** Y Y **33** What is **not** a function of meiosis? **A** producing genetically different cells **B** producing nuclei in ovules **C** producing sperm cells **D** repairing damaged tissues 


© UCLES 2016 0610/12/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**34** A farmer buys a bull with unusual curved horns. He wants to know if the bull is pure-breeding for curved horns. He mates the bull with cows in his herd which are all pure-breeding for straight horns. 

 Which proportion of calves shows that the bull is pure-breeding for curved horns? 

 A all with curved horns 

 B half with straight horns 

 C three-quarters with curved horns 

 D three-quarters with straight horns 

**35** The phenotype of an organism is its 

 A combination of alleles. 

 B family pedigree. 

 C genetic make-up. 

 D observable features. 

**36** An insect is usually pale in colour which helps to camouflage it on tree trunks. Occasionally black individuals of this insect occur. 

 If the tree becomes dark in colour due to pollution, then the black individuals become more common. 

 Which process causes this? 

 A biotechnology 

 B conservation 

 C natural selection 

 D selective breeding 


© UCLES 2016 0610/12/O/N/16 

**37** The graph shows how the world population of humans is increasing. 

## 1000 1250 1500 1750 2000 

 time / years 

 world population size 

 What has contributed to this increase? 

 A a high death rate in developing countries 

 B drought leading to famine 

 C improved medical care 

 D the widespread use of contraception 

**38** Why is yeast used in bread-making? 

 A Aerobic respiration produces alcohol. 

 B Aerobic respiration produces lactic acid. 

 C Anaerobic respiration produces alcohol. 

 D Anaerobic respiration produces carbon dioxide. 

**39** What is an example of genetic engineering? 

 A inserting genes into bacteria 

 B inserting insulin into bacteria 

 C spraying plants with herbicides 

 D using pectinase to make fruit juice 


© UCLES 2016 0610/12/O/N/16 

**40** The diagram shows the results of a survey on the types of animals found along a stretch of river near to a factory. 

 rat-tailed maggot sludge worm blood worm 

 mayfly nymph stonefly nymph 

 mayfly nymph stonefly nymph 

 shrimp caddis fly larva 

 blood worm leech water louse snail 

 factory emptying pollutants into the water 

 direction of water flow 

 Which of the following animals lives in the most polluted water? 

 A blood worm 

 B caddis fly larva 

 C leech 

 D stonefly nymph 


## BLANK PAGE 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2016 0610/12/O/N/16 


