 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 17 printed pages and 3 blank pages. 

 IB16 11_0610_11/3RP © UCLES 2016 [Turn over 

# *0323781782* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## BIOLOGY 0610/11 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) October/November 2016 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2016 0610/11/O/N/16 

**1** The diagram shows a plant that has been placed near a sunlit window for a few weeks. 

 Which two characteristics of living organisms have affected the shape of the plant? 

 A excretion and sensitivity 

 B growth and reproduction 

 C reproduction and excretion 

 D sensitivity and growth 

**2** What is a characteristic of amphibians but **not** of reptiles? 

 A four limbs 

 B laying eggs in water 

 C scaly skin 

 D using lungs for breathing 

**3** The diagram shows an insect. 

 Use the key to identify the insect. 

 1 wings present ........................................... go to 2 

 wings absent ............................................ A 

 2 two pairs of wings ..................................... go to 3 

 one pair of wings ...................................... B 

 3 wings with circular markings ..................... C 

 wings without circular markings ................ D 


© UCLES 2016 0610/11/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**4** The diagram shows a spongy mesophyll cell from a green leaf. 

 1 

 2 

 3 

## 4 

## 5 

 Which labelled structures are not found in animal cells? 

 A 1, 3 and 4 B 1, 4 and 5 C 2, 3 and 4 D 3, 4 and 5 

**5** What are the features of the cell walls in a xylem vessel? 

 end wall side wall 

 A absent thick 

 B absent thin 

 C present thick 

 D present thin 

**6** The diagram shows a plant cell which has lost water to its surroundings by osmosis. 

 Which part is the partially permeable membrane? 

 A 

## B 

## C 

## D 


© UCLES 2016 0610/11/O/N/16 

**7** Which identifies the chemical elements found in proteins? 

 carbon hydrogen oxygen nitrogen 

 A     key 

 B     = present 

 C     = absent 

 D     

**8** What controls the speed of chemical reactions in all living cells? 

 A enzymes 

 B hormones 

 C ions 

 D vitamins 

**9** Where are carbohydrates made in a green leaf? 

 A cell vacuoles 

 B chloroplasts 

 C phloem 

 D xylem 

**10** How does carbon dioxide pass through the stomata of a leaf? 

 A active transport 

 B diffusion 

 C osmosis 

 D transpiration 

**11** The roots of plants take up nitrates from the soil. 

 What are the nitrates used to make? 

 A fat 

 B glucose 

 C protein 

 D starch 


© UCLES 2016 0610/11/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**12** A child decided to eat only meat, oily fish, cheese and bread, and drink only water. 

 Which nutrient would be in low levels in this diet? 

 A calcium 

 B iron 

 C vitamin C 

 D vitamin D 

**13** The diagram shows the human alimentary canal. 

 Which labelled part absorbs the most water? 

## D 

## A 

## C 

## B 

**14** Which substances are produced by the action of amylase on starch? 

 A amino acids 

 B fatty acids and glycerol 

 C salts 

 D simple sugars 


© UCLES 2016 0610/11/O/N/16 

**15** The diagram shows the stem of a plant. A strip of the outer tissue including the phloem has been removed. 

 xylem 

 phloem 

 How is transport in the plant affected? 

 A Amino acids and sugar cannot pass to the roots. 

 B Dissolved salts cannot pass to the leaves. 

 C Water cannot pass to the leaves. 

 D Water cannot pass to the roots. 

**16** The diagrams show stages in the passage of water through a plant. 

 Which arrow shows water moving in the form of water vapour? 

## C 

## D 

## A 

## B 


© UCLES 2016 0610/11/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**17** Which graph shows the effect of increasing humidity on the rate of transpiration? 

 A 

 humidity 

 rate of transpiration 

## B 

 humidity 

 rate of transpiration 

## C 

 humidity 

 rate of transpiration 

## D 

 humidity 

 rate of transpiration 


© UCLES 2016 0610/11/O/N/16 

**18** The diagram shows a garden pond with a fountain worked by a pump. The fountain brings oxygen from the air to fish in the pond. 

 water pump 

## P 

## Q 

 The system can be compared with part of the human circulatory system. The pump is compared with the heart. 

 What are P and Q compared with? 

## P Q 

 A aorta pulmonary artery 

 B pulmonary artery vena cava 

 C pulmonary vein vena cava 

 D vena cava aorta 

**19** The diagram shows sections through three types of blood vessel, **not** drawn to the same scale. 

## V W X 

 Which section is from a vein and which is from a capillary? 

 vein capillary 

 A V W 

 B W V 

 C W X 

 D X W 


© UCLES 2016 0610/11/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**20** The diagram shows human blood cells, as seen under a microscope. 

 X 

 What is the function of cell X? 

 A to carry glucose 

 B to carry oxygen 

 C to defend against disease 

 D to make the blood clot 

**21** What is the approximate composition of the air breathed out by a person? 

 oxygen % 

 carbon dioxide % 

 A 5 73 

 B 16 4 

 C 21 0.04 

 D 78 2 

**22** Which substances are produced by respiration in humans? 

 carbon dioxide 

 alcohol (ethanol) water^ lactic acid 

 A     

 B     

 C     

 D     


© UCLES 2016 0610/11/O/N/16 

**23** The apparatus shown is set up and left for one hour. 

 mixture of yeast, sugar and water 

 indicator solution 

 A gas is released by the mixture. It caused the indicator solution to go cloudy. 

 What is the indicator solution? 

 A alcohol 

 B Benedict’s solution 

 C biuret solution 

 D limewater 

**24** A person is regularly connected to a machine that removes wastes, and excess salts and water, from their blood. 

 Which organ’s function does the machine carry out? 

 A bladder 

 B kidney 

 C liver 

 D lung 


© UCLES 2016 0610/11/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**25** The diagram shows the human nervous system. 

## 4 

## 2 

## 3 

## 1 

 Which two structures form the central nervous system? 

 A 1 and 3 B 1 and 4 C 2 and 3 D 2 and 4 

**26** The flow diagram shows the pathway that causes pupil diameter to decrease in response to bright light. 

 bright light 

 receptor cell X 

 central nervous system 

 neurone 

 reduced pupil diameter 

 What does X represent? 

 A iris 

 B motor neurone 

 C relay neurone 

 D sensory neurone 


© UCLES 2016 0610/11/O/N/16 

**27** The diagram shows seedlings in two experiments on the tropic response of seedlings to gravity and light. 

shoot (^) shoot start of experiment in the dark 3 days later shoot shoot start of experiment 3 days later light from one side to show the effect of gravity to show the effect of light Experiment 1 Experiment 2 How have the seedlings responded? to gravity to light **A**   key **B**   = tropic response shown **C**   = no tropic response shown **D**   **28** When does fertilisation occur in humans? **A** when an egg is released **B** when implantation occurs **C** when sperm and egg nuclei fuse **D** when sperm are released 


© UCLES 2016 0610/11/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**29** The diagram shows part of the reproductive system of a human female. 

 In which labelled region would implantation of a zygote normally take place? 

## A B 

## C 

## D 

**30** The diagrams show four methods of birth control. 

 Which one is placed in the uterus? 

 A B C D 

MON (^) TUE WED (^) THU (^) FRI (^) SAT (^) SUN SUN (^) SAT FRI (^) THU (^) WED TUEMON SUN (^) SAT FRI (^) THU (^) WED TUE MON MON (^) TUE WED (^) THU (^) FRI (^) SAT WHEN THIS PACK IS EMPTY START A NEW ONE IMMEDIATELY^ SUN O R A L (^) C O N T R A C E P T I V E (^) T A B L E T S MON TUE WED THU FRI (^) SAT SUN SUN SAT (^) FRI THU WED TUE MON SUN SAT FRI (^) THU WED TUE MON MON TUE WED THU FRI SAT SUN WHEN THIS PACK IS EMPTY START A NEW ONE IMMEDIATELY O R A L C O N T R A C E P T I V E T A B L E T S **31** What is the definition of an allele? **A** a length of DNA that codes for a protein **B** a thread-like structure, carrying genes **C** a version of a gene **D** the genetic make up of an organism **32** Which row describes the cells produced in meiosis, and a function of this type of nuclear division? cells produced function **A** genetically different asexual reproduction **B** genetically different sexual reproduction **C** genetically identical asexual reproduction **D** genetically identical sexual reproduction 


© UCLES 2016 0610/11/O/N/16 

**33** A brown mouse mates with a white mouse. There are 8 brown mice and 9 white mice in the offspring. 

 The same two mice mate again. There are 9 brown mice and 7 white mice in the offspring. 

 What are the genotypes of the parents most likely to be? 

 A heterozygous × heterozygous 

 B homozygous dominant × heterozygous 

 C homozygous dominant × homozygous recessive 

 D homozygous recessive × heterozygous 

**34** What is the principal source of energy input into a food chain? 

 A primary consumer 

 B producer 

 C secondary consumer 

 D the Sun 

**35** The diagram shows a food web. 

 Which arrow does not show the direction of energy flow? 

 herbivores 

 decomposers 

 plants carnivores 

## C 

## A 

## B 

## D 


© UCLES 2016 0610/11/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**36** The diagram shows part of the carbon cycle. 

 organic compounds in plants 

 carbon dioxide 

 organic compounds in animals 

 deposits of coal, petroleum and natural gas 

## Z 

 What is the process labelled Z? 

 A decomposition 

 B fossilisation 

 C photosynthesis 

 D respiration 


© UCLES 2016 0610/11/O/N/16 

**37** The graph shows the population of mosquito larvae in a pond. On day 3, fish that eat mosquito larvae are released into the pond. 

## 1 2 3 4 

 time / days 

## 0 5 6 7 8 

## 800 

## 700 

## 600 

## 500 

## 400 

## 300 

## 200 

## 100 

## 0 

 population of mosquito larvae / number per m 3 

 fish released 

 What is the most likely reason for the decline in the population of larvae after day 3? 

 A disease 

 B lack of oxygen 

 C old age 

 D predation 

**38** Why is yeast used in bread-making? 

 A Aerobic respiration produces alcohol. 

 B Aerobic respiration produces lactic acid. 

 C Anaerobic respiration produces alcohol. 

 D Anaerobic respiration produces carbon dioxide. 

**39** Which agricultural activity does **not** result in pollution of nearby rivers? 

 A adding artificial fertilisers 

 B digging plant material into the soil 

 C spraying with herbicides 

 D spraying with insecticides 


© UCLES 2016 0610/11/O/N/16 

**40** The diagram shows the results of a survey on the types of animals found along a stretch of river near to a factory. 

 rat-tailed maggot sludge worm blood worm 

 mayfly nymph stonefly nymph 

 mayfly nymph stonefly nymph 

 shrimp caddis fly larva 

 blood worm leech water louse snail 

 factory emptying pollutants into the water 

 direction of water flow 

 Which of the following animals lives in the most polluted water? 

 A blood worm 

 B caddis fly larva 

 C leech 

 D stonefly nymph 


## BLANK PAGE 

© UCLES 2016 0610/11/O/N/16 


## BLANK PAGE 

© UCLES 2016 0610/11/O/N/16 


## BLANK PAGE 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2016 0610/11/O/N/16 


