 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. 

 IB16 11_0610_23/4RP © UCLES 2016 [Turn over 

# *9281735485* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## BIOLOGY 0610/23 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) October/November 2016 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2016 0610/23/O/N/16 

**1** Breathing out combines which two characteristics of living organisms? 

 A excretion and movement 

 B excretion and respiration 

 C movement and sensitivity 

 D sensitivity and respiration 

**2** Scientists discover a new species of animal. 

 It has a segmented body with two pairs of legs on each segment. 

 To which group of animals does this new species belong? 

 A arachnids 

 B crustaceans 

 C insects 

 D myriapods 

**3** The diagram shows an insect. 

 Use the key to identify the insect. 

 1 wings present ........................................... go to 2 

 wings absent ............................................ A 

 2 two pairs of wings ..................................... go to 3 

 one pair of wings ...................................... B 

 3 wings with circular markings ..................... C 

 wings without circular markings ................ D 

**4** Which feature shows that a cell is a plant cell? 

 A cell membrane 

 B cell wall 

 C cytoplasm 

 D nucleus 


© UCLES 2016 0610/23/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**5** The diagram shows an image of a chloroplast. The image is 5 cm long. 

 The actual length of the chloroplast is 5 μm. 

 What is the magnification of the image? 

 A × 10 B × 1000 C × 10 000 D × 100 000 

**6** The diagram shows a plant cell which has lost water to its surroundings by osmosis. 

 Which part is the partially permeable membrane? 

 A 

## B 

## C 

## D 

**7** What describes active transport? 

 energy required particles move against concentration gradient 

 A   

 B   

 C   

 D   


© UCLES 2016 0610/23/O/N/16 

**8** The graph shows how the activity of an enzyme varies with temperature. 

 rate of enzyme activity 

 temperature / °C 

## 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 

 What is the best or optimum temperature for this enzyme and at what temperature is the enzyme not working? 

 temperature / °C 

 best not working 

 A 30 0 

 B 30 60 

 C 50 0 

 D 50 60 

**9** How does a plant use the sugar that it makes? 

 stored as starch 

 used for photosynthesis 

 used for respiration 

 used to make cellulose 

 A     

 B     

 C     

 D     


© UCLES 2016 0610/23/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**10** The diagram shows a leaf as seen in cross-section under the microscope. 

## 1 

## 2 

## 3 

 What are tissues 1, 2 and 3? 

## 1 2 3 

 A epidermis palisade mesophyll spongy mesophyll 

 B epidermis spongy mesophyll palisade mesophyll 

 C palisade mesophyll epidermis spongy mesophyll 

 D spongy mesophyll palisade mesophyll epidermis 

**11** The roots of plants take up nitrates from the soil. 

 What are the nitrates used to make? 

 A fat 

 B glucose 

 C protein 

 D starch 


© UCLES 2016 0610/23/O/N/16 

**12** Which disease do children suffer from if they do not get enough iron from their diet? 

 A anaemia 

 B kwashiorkor 

 C marasmus 

 D rickets 

**13** What is the correct order of the processes that take place in the alimentary canal? 

 A absorption, digestion, ingestion, egestion 

 B digestion, ingestion, egestion, absorption 

 C egestion, digestion, absorption, ingestion 

 D ingestion, digestion, absorption, egestion 

**14** The diagram shows part of the human alimentary canal. 

 Which organ produces hydrochloric acid? 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 


© UCLES 2016 0610/23/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**15** The diagram shows the stem of a plant. A strip of the outer tissue including the phloem has been removed. 

 xylem 

 phloem 

 How is transport in the plant affected? 

 A Amino acids and sugar cannot pass to the roots. 

 B Dissolved salts cannot pass to the leaves. 

 C Water cannot pass to the leaves. 

 D Water cannot pass to the roots. 

**16** Which changes in atmospheric conditions can cause a plant to wilt? 

 humidity temperature 

 A decrease decrease 

 B decrease increase 

 C increase decrease 

 D increase increase 

**17** Which substance is moved by translocation in a flowering plant? 

 A amino acid 

 B cellulose 

 C fat 

 D starch 

**18** What is a double circulation? 

 A Blood circulates through arteries and veins. 

 B Blood circulates through two hearts. 

 C Blood flows through the heart twice for each circulation. 

 D Blood flows twice around the body before going to the lungs. 


© UCLES 2016 0610/23/O/N/16 

**19** The graph shows the thickness of the muscular wall in each of the four chambers of the heart. 

 Which chamber is the right ventricle? 

 thickness of muscular wall 

## A B 

 heart chamber 

## C D 

**20** The diagram shows human blood cells, as seen under a microscope. 

 X 

 What is the function of cell X? 

 A to carry glucose 

 B to carry oxygen 

 C to defend against disease 

 D to make the blood clot 

**21** What are disease-causing organisms? 

 A antibodies 

 B pathogens 

 C phagocytes 

 D vaccines 


© UCLES 2016 0610/23/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**22** Which row describes active immunity? 

 depends on phagocytes 

 memory cells are produced 

 A   

 B   

 C   

 D   

**23** After a race, athletes experience oxygen debt. 

 The diagram shows how the oxygen debt is removed. 

 lactic acid forms in the muscles 

 lactic acid moves in the blood to the liver 

 deep breathing continues, supplying extra oxygen 

## X 

 What happens at X? 

 A aerobic respiration of glucose 

 B aerobic respiration of lactic acid 

 C anaerobic respiration of glucose 

 D anaerobic respiration of lactic acid 

**24** What is the equation for aerobic respiration in plants? 

 A C 6 H 12 O 6 + 6O 2 → 6CO 2 + 6H 2 O 

 B C 6 H 12 O 6 → 2C 3 H 6 O 3 

 C 6CO 2 + 6H 2 O → C 6 H 12 O 6 + 6O 2 

 D C 6 H 12 O 6 → 2C 2 H 5 OH + 2CO 2 


© UCLES 2016 0610/23/O/N/16 

**25** The diagram shows a vertical section through the front part of an eye when viewing a near object. 

## R 

## S 

 What describes structures R and S? 

 R under tension S contracted 

 A   

 B   

 C   

 D   

**26** When the blood glucose concentration is low, which hormone is released and which organ releases it? 

 hormone organ 

 A glucagon liver 

 B glucagon pancreas 

 C insulin liver 

 D insulin pancreas 


© UCLES 2016 0610/23/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**27** The diagram shows seedlings in two experiments on the tropic response of seedlings to gravity and light. 

shoot (^) shoot start of experiment in the dark 3 days later shoot shoot start of experiment 3 days later light from one side to show the effect of gravity to show the effect of light Experiment 1 Experiment 2 How have the seedlings responded? to gravity to light **A**   key **B**   = tropic response shown **C**   = no tropic response shown **D**   **28** When does fertilisation occur in humans? **A** when an egg is released **B** when implantation occurs **C** when sperm and egg nuclei fuse **D** when sperm are released 


© UCLES 2016 0610/23/O/N/16 

**29** The diagram shows the structure of a sperm cell. 

 Which part is the flagellum? 

## A 

## B C D 

**30** The graph shows a hormone that is involved in controlling the menstrual cycle. 

 hormone concentration 

## 0 14 28 

 time / days 

 What is the hormone? 

 A FSH 

 B LH 

 C oestrogen 

 D progesterone 

**31** What happens in mitosis? 

 genetically identical cells produced 

 chromosome number is halved 

 A   

 B   

 C   

 D   


© UCLES 2016 0610/23/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**32** Ernst and Amy have four children of different blood groups, as shown. 

 Ernst Amy 

 Jan group A 

 Jack group AB 

 Cara group O 

 Kris group B 

 What are the genotypes of Ernst and Amy? 

 A I AI A^ and I BI o 

 B I AI B^ and I oI o 

 C I AI o^ and I BI B 

 D I AI o^ and I BI o 

**33** What is an adaptive feature of xerophytes? 

 A do not have root hair cells 

 B leaves have large surface area 

 C stomata are in pits 

 D thin cuticles 

**34** What are possible positions in a food chain of a carnivore and a herbivore? 

 carnivore herbivore 

 A primary consumer producer 

 B secondary consumer primary consumer 

 C secondary consumer tertiary consumer 

 D tertiary consumer secondary consumer 


© UCLES 2016 0610/23/O/N/16 

**35** The diagram shows part of the nitrogen cycle. 

 nitrogen in air 

 nitrogen compounds in plants 

 nitrogen compounds in animals 

 nitrogen compounds in soil 

## S 

 What is process S? 

 A denitrification 

 B nitrification 

 C nitrogen fixation 

 D nutrition 

**36** The graph shows the growth of a yeast population. 

 biomass 

 time / days 

## 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 

 When was the rate at which cells were dying equal to the rate at which new cells were being formed? 

 A day 3 B day 5 C day 9 D day 11 


© UCLES 2016 0610/23/O/N/16 

**37** Which structures, found in bacteria, make them useful in genetic engineering? 

 A cell walls 

 B membranes 

 C plasmids 

 D mitochondria 

**38** Why is yeast used in bread-making? 

 A Aerobic respiration produces alcohol. 

 B Aerobic respiration produces lactic acid. 

 C Anaerobic respiration produces alcohol. 

 D Anaerobic respiration produces carbon dioxide. 

**39** An advantage of some genetically modified crop plants is that they will **not** 

 A be affected by herbicides. 

 B need carbon dioxide. 

 C need magnesium ions. 

 D need water. 

**40** Fertiliser leaks into a river resulting in eutrophication. 

 What is the correct order of events leading to the death of animals in the river? 

## A 

 increased decomposition of dead plants 

 increased growth of plants 

 reduction in dissolved oxygen 

 increased aerobic respiration by decomposers 

## B 

 increased decomposition of dead plants 

 increased growth of plants 

 reduction in dissolved oxygen 

 increased aerobic respiration by decomposers 

## C 

 increased decomposition of dead plants 

 increased growth of plants 

 reduction in dissolved oxygen 

 increased aerobic respiration by decomposers 

## D 

 increased decomposition of dead plants 

 increased growth of plants 

 reduction in dissolved oxygen 

 increased aerobic respiration by decomposers 


## BLANK PAGE 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2016 0610/23/O/N/16 


