 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 16 printed pages. 

 IB16 11_0610_21/5RP © UCLES 2016 [Turn over 

# *3193869340* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## BIOLOGY 0610/21 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) October/November 2016 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2016 0610/21/O/N/16 

**1** The diagram shows a plant that has been placed near a sunlit window for a few weeks. 

 Which two characteristics of living organisms have affected the shape of the plant? 

 A excretion and sensitivity 

 B growth and reproduction 

 C reproduction and excretion 

 D sensitivity and growth 

**2** What is a characteristic of amphibians but **not** of reptiles? 

 A four limbs 

 B laying eggs in water 

 C scaly skin 

 D using lungs for breathing 

**3** The diagram shows an insect. 

 Use the key to identify the insect. 

 1 wings present ........................................... go to 2 

 wings absent ............................................ A 

 2 two pairs of wings ..................................... go to 3 

 one pair of wings ...................................... B 

 3 wings with circular markings ..................... C 

 wings without circular markings ................ D 


© UCLES 2016 0610/21/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**4** The diagram shows a spongy mesophyll cell from a green leaf. 

 1 

 2 

 3 

## 4 

## 5 

 Which labelled structures are not found in animal cells? 

 A 1, 3 and 4 B 1, 4 and 5 C 2, 3 and 4 D 3, 4 and 5 

**5** What are the features of the cell walls in a xylem vessel? 

 end wall side wall 

 A absent thick 

 B absent thin 

 C present thick 

 D present thin 

**6** The diagram shows a plant cell which has lost water to its surroundings by osmosis. 

 Which part is the partially permeable membrane? 

 A 

## B 

## C 

## D 


© UCLES 2016 0610/21/O/N/16 

**7** Commercial fishermen use ice to store the fish that they catch. 

 How does the ice keep the fish fresh? 

 A Cells denature. 

 B Decomposer activity decreases. 

 C Decomposer activity increases. 

 D Proteins denature. 

**8** What controls the speed of chemical reactions in all living cells? 

 A enzymes 

 B hormones 

 C ions 

 D vitamins 

**9** The diagram shows how the rate of photosynthesis varies with light intensity. 

 The four curves show different conditions of temperature and carbon dioxide concentration. 

 rate of photosynthesis 

 light intensity 

30 °C, 0.2% CO (^2) 20 °C, 0.2% CO (^2) 30 °C, 0.1% CO (^2) 20 °C, 0.1% CO (^2) 

## P 

 What limits the rate of photosynthesis at point P? 

 light intensity carbon dioxideconcentration temperature 

## A    

## B    

## C    

## D    


© UCLES 2016 0610/21/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**10** The diagram shows part of a leaf in cross-section. 

 1 

## 4 

## 3 

## 2 

 What shows the correct function of a numbered part? 

 part functions 

 A 1 photosynthesis 

 B 2 gaseous exchange 

 C 3 transport of water from the root 

 D 4 transport of sugars to the root 

**11** The roots of plants take up nitrates from the soil. 

 What are the nitrates used to make? 

 A fat 

 B glucose 

 C protein 

 D starch 

**12** Which diseases are caused by a lack of iron and a lack of vitamin D? 

 lack of iron lack of vitamin D 

 A anaemia soft bones 

 B kwashiorkor anaemia 

 C kwashiorkor soft bones 

 D soft bones anaemia 


© UCLES 2016 0610/21/O/N/16 

**13** The diagram shows the human alimentary canal. 

 Which labelled part absorbs the most water? 

## D 

## A 

## C 

## B 

**14** The cholera bacterium produces toxins that cause chloride ions to be secreted into the small intestine. 

 How does this affect the water potential of blood in the intestinal capillaries and the intestinal contents? 

 water potential 

 blood in capillaries 

 contents of small intestine 

 A lowered lowered 

 B lowered raised 

 C raised lowered 

 D raised raised 


© UCLES 2016 0610/21/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**15** The diagram shows the stem of a plant. A strip of the outer tissue including the phloem has been removed. 

 xylem 

 phloem 

 How is transport in the plant affected? 

 A Amino acids and sugar cannot pass to the roots. 

 B Dissolved salts cannot pass to the leaves. 

 C Water cannot pass to the leaves. 

 D Water cannot pass to the roots. 

**16** The diagrams show stages in the passage of water through a plant. 

 Which arrow shows water moving in the form of water vapour? 

## C 

## D 

## A 

## B 


© UCLES 2016 0610/21/O/N/16 

**17** Which substance is moved by translocation in a flowering plant? 

 A amino acid 

 B cellulose 

 C fat 

 D starch 

**18** The diagram shows a garden pond with a fountain worked by a pump. The fountain brings oxygen from the air to fish in the pond. 

 water^ pump 

## P 

## Q 

 The system can be compared with part of the human circulatory system. The pump is compared with the heart. 

 What are P and Q compared with? 

## P Q 

 A aorta pulmonary artery 

 B pulmonary artery vena cava 

 C pulmonary vein vena cava 

 D vena cava aorta 

**19** What happens when the left ventricle contracts? 

 atrioventricular valves 

 semilunar valves 

 A closed closed 

 B closed open 

 C open closed 

 D open open 


© UCLES 2016 0610/21/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**20** The diagram shows human blood cells, as seen under a microscope. 

 X 

 What is the function of cell X? 

 A to carry glucose 

 B to carry oxygen 

 C to defend against disease 

 D to make the blood clot 

**21** What is **not** a consequence of vaccination? 

 A Antigens trigger an immune response. 

 B Antibodies lock onto antigens. 

 C Memory cells are produced. 

 D Phagocytes produce antibodies. 

**22** Which sequence of changes takes place when we breathe in? 

 A diaphragm contracts → volume of thorax increases → pressure in lungs decreases 

 B diaphragm contracts → volume of thorax increases → pressure in lungs increases 

 C diaphragm relaxes → volume of thorax increases → pressure in lungs decreases 

 D diaphragm relaxes → volume of thorax increases → pressure in lungs increases 


© UCLES 2016 0610/21/O/N/16 

**23** After a race, athletes experience oxygen debt. 

 The diagram shows how the oxygen debt is removed. 

 lactic acid forms in the muscles 

 lactic acid moves in the blood to the liver 

 deep breathing continues, supplying extra oxygen 

## X 

 What happens at X? 

 A aerobic respiration of glucose 

 B aerobic respiration of lactic acid 

 C anaerobic respiration of glucose 

 D anaerobic respiration of lactic acid 

**24** What happens as a result of deamination in the liver? 

 A Alcohol is broken down. 

 B Glycogen is stored. 

 C Glucose is produced. 

 D Urea is produced. 


© UCLES 2016 0610/21/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**25** The diagram shows a section through a human eye. 

## P 

## Q 

 Good colour vision is a result of a high concentration of which type of cells at which position? 

 A cones at P 

 B cones at Q 

 C rods at P 

 D rods at Q 

**26** When the blood glucose concentration is low, which hormone is released and which organ releases it? 

 hormone organ 

 A glucagon liver 

 B glucagon pancreas 

 C insulin liver 

 D insulin pancreas 


© UCLES 2016 0610/21/O/N/16 

**27** The diagram shows seedlings in two experiments on the tropic response of seedlings to gravity and light. 

shoot (^) shoot start of experiment in the dark 3 days later shoot shoot start of experiment 3 days later light from one side to show the effect of gravity to show the effect of light Experiment 1 Experiment 2 How have the seedlings responded? to gravity to light **A**   key **B**   = tropic response shown **C**   = no tropic response shown **D**   **28** When does fertilisation occur in humans? **A** when an egg is released **B** when implantation occurs **C** when sperm and egg nuclei fuse **D** when sperm are released 


© UCLES 2016 0610/21/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**29** What is the function of the many mitochondria in a sperm cell? 

 A to help penetrate the egg cell 

 B to provide energy for movement 

 C to store food molecules 

 D to synthesise enzymes 

**30** The graph shows changes in the concentrations of four hormones during the menstrual cycle. 

 Which hormone is progesterone? 

 concentration in blood 

## 0 7 14 

 time / days 

## 21 28 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 

**31** One parent has blood group A and the other parent has blood group B. 

 Their first child has blood group O. 

 What are the possible blood groups of their next child? 

 group A group B group AB group O 

 A     

 B     

 C     

 D     


© UCLES 2016 0610/21/O/N/16 

**32** Hb A^ is the allele for normal haemoglobin and Hb S^ is the allele for abnormal haemoglobin that causes sickle-shaped red blood cells. 

 Which row correctly matches a genotype to its phenotype? 

 genotype 

 person has sickle-cell anaemia 

 person has resistance to malaria 

 A Hb A^ Hb A^   

 B Hb S^ Hb A^   

 C Hb S^ Hb A^   

 D Hb S^ Hb S^   

**33** How do the leaves of hydrophytes differ from those of xerophytes? 

 A smaller stomata 

 B smaller total surface area 

 C stomata on the undersides of the leaves 

 D thinner cuticle 

**34** The diagram shows a food chain. 

 240 J eaten by caterpillar 

 120 J egested in faeces 

 22 J egested in faeces 

 70 J lost in respiration 20 J lost in respiration 

 plant 

 caterpillar 

 bird 

 How much energy is transferred to the bird? 

 A 8 J B 42 J C 50 J D 240 J 


© UCLES 2016 0610/21/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**35** The diagram shows part of the nitrogen cycle. 

 nitrogen in atmosphere 

 ammonium salts in soil 

 protein in animals 

 protein in plants 

 nitrates in soil 

## X 

 What could be responsible for process X? 

 A decomposers 

 B denitrifying bacteria 

 C lightning 

 D nitrifying bacteria 

**36** Which statement describes the effect of predation and disease on a population? 

 A They cause an exponential (log) increase in the population size. 

 B They control the rate of growth of the population. 

 C They decrease the food supply available to the population. 

 D They reduce the lag phase of the population. 

**37** Which structures, found in bacteria, make them useful in genetic engineering? 

 A cell walls 

 B membranes 

 C plasmids 

 D mitochondria 

**38** Why is yeast used in bread-making? 

 A Aerobic respiration produces alcohol. 

 B Aerobic respiration produces lactic acid. 

 C Anaerobic respiration produces alcohol. 

 D Anaerobic respiration produces carbon dioxide. 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2016 0610/21/O/N/16 

**39** An advantage of some genetically modified crop plants is that they will **not** 

 A be affected by herbicides. 

 B need carbon dioxide. 

 C need magnesium ions. 

 D need water. 

**40** What is **not** a reason for having conservation programmes? 

 A introducing species to new environments 

 B maintaining resources 

 C protecting vulnerable environments 

 D reducing extinction 


