 This syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. 

 IB18 03_0610_12/4RP © UCLES 2018 [Turn over 

# *0935368408* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## BIOLOGY 0610/12 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) February/March 2018 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2018 0610/12/F/M/18 

**1** What is a characteristic of all living organisms? 

 A breathing 

 B egestion 

 C excretion 

 D ingestion 

**2** What are the characteristics of fish? 

 maintain constant body temperature 

 external ears present 

 jelly-covered eggs scales 

## A     

## B     

## C     

## D     

**3** The diagram shows part of a flowering plant. 

 Using the key, identify this plant. 

 1 three petals ................................................. go to 2 

 more than three petals ............................... go to 3 

 2 leaves longer than they are wide ................ A 

 leaves wider than they are long .................. B 

 3 leaves parallel-veined ................................. C 

 leaves not parallel-veined ........................... D 


© UCLES 2018 0610/12/F/M/18 **[Turn over** 

**4** The diagram shows a single cell from an organism called _Spirogyra_. 

 vacuole 

 cytoplasm chloroplast cell wall 

 cytoplasmic nucleus strand 

 Which features does Spirogyra share with plant cells? 

 cell wall chloroplast cytoplasm nucleus vacuole 

 A      

 B      

 C      

 D      


© UCLES 2018 0610/12/F/M/18 

**5** Which level of organisation is shown in the diagram? 

 heart 

 lung capillaries 

 body capillaries 

 A organ 

 B organism 

 C organ system 

 D tissue 

**6** An egg measured 6.5 cm in diameter. A student made a drawing of this egg and the diameter was measured as 19.5 cm. 

 What was the magnification of the drawing? 

 A ×0.3 B ×3.0 C ×6.5 D × 300 


© UCLES 2018 0610/12/F/M/18 **[Turn over** 

**7** The diagram shows a plant cell. 

 What is the appearance of this cell after it has been placed in pure water for 30 minutes? 

 A B 

## C D 

**8** When a food substance is tested with iodine solution, which colour shows the presence of starch? 

 A blue-black 

 B brown 

 C orange 

 D purple 


© UCLES 2018 0610/12/F/M/18 

**9** The graph shows the activity of three digestive enzymes at differing pH levels. 

 enzyme activity 

## 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 

 pH 

## X Y Z 

 Which statement is correct? 

 A Enzymes X and Y are both active at pH 7. 

 B Enzymes X and Z are both active at pH 4. 

 C Enzymes Y and Z are both active at pH 4. 

 D Enzymes Y and Z are both active at pH 8. 

**10** The diagram shows a cross-section of part of a leaf. 

 upper epidermis 

 lower epidermis 

 midrib 

 layer X 

 Which type of cell is found in layer X? 

 A B C D 


© UCLES 2018 0610/12/F/M/18 **[Turn over** 

**11** Which molecule contains magnesium? 

 A chlorophyll 

 B fat 

 C glucose 

 D starch 

**12** In which part of the body of a mammal does mechanical digestion occur? 

 A gall bladder 

 B liver 

 C mouth 

 D pancreas 

**13** In which order does water pass through these tissues in a plant? 

 A mesophyll → xylem → root cortex 

 B root cortex → mesophyll → xylem 

 C root cortex → xylem → mesophyll 

 D xylem → mesophyll → root cortex 

**14** Which part of the blood contains haemoglobin? 

 A plasma 

 B platelets 

 C red blood cells 

 D white blood cells 

**15** The body has defences to protect itself from diseases. 

 What is a mechanical barrier to diseases? 

 A hairs in the nose 

 B plasma 

 C stomach acid 

 D white blood cells 


© UCLES 2018 0610/12/F/M/18 

**16** Compared with inspired air, which description of expired air is correct? 

 A It has less oxygen and less carbon dioxide. 

 B It has less oxygen and more carbon dioxide. 

 C It has more oxygen and less carbon dioxide. 

 D It has more oxygen and more carbon dioxide. 

**17** An experiment is set up to investigate the uptake of oxygen by germinating seeds. 

## X Y 

 soda lime absorbs carbon dioxide dead seeds rinsed germinating in antiseptic seeds 

 water bath at 25 °C 

 coloured water 

 coloured water 

 What happens to the levels of the coloured water at X and Y? 

## X Y 

 A falls rises 

 B falls unchanged 

 C rises falls 

 D rises unchanged 

**18** Which organ regulates the amount of water in a mammal’s body? 

 A kidney 

 B liver 

 C lungs 

 D skin 


© UCLES 2018 0610/12/F/M/18 **[Turn over** 

**19** A boy accidentally touches a very hot object and immediately takes his hand away. 

 In this reflex action, what is the effector? 

 A a heat receptor in his hand 

 B a motor neurone 

 C a muscle in his arm 

 D the spinal cord 

**20** The graph shows the effect of an antibiotic treatment on bacterial populations in the blood. 

## 0 

 time / days 

## 10 

 bacterial population 

 start of antibiotic treatment 

 Which conclusion can be drawn from the graph? 

 A Antibiotics are effective against viral and bacterial infections. 

 B Antibiotics cause meiosis in bacteria. 

 C Antibiotics take ten days to kill all bacteria. 

 D Before the start of antibiotic treatment the bacterial population was rising. 

**21** Drinking alcohol before driving a car is dangerous. 

 Which statement correctly explains why drinking alcohol and driving is dangerous? 

 A Alcohol increases reaction time. 

 B Alcohol can cause liver damage. 

 C Alcohol is a drug. 

 D Alcohol is addictive. 


© UCLES 2018 0610/12/F/M/18 

**22** Which statement about sexual reproduction is correct? 

 A It is a process that involves the fusion of two nuclei. 

 B It always produces genetically identical offspring. 

 C No zygote is formed. 

 D There is no fertilisation. 

**23** The diagram shows a cross-section of a flower. 

 Where does fertilisation take place? 

## B 

## D 

## C 

## A 

**24** The graph shows changes in the thickness of the lining of the uterus wall during a menstrual cycle. 

 days of the menstrual cycle 

## 1 7 14 21 28 

 thickness of uterus wall lining 

 Which day is the last day of menstruation? 

 A 4 B 8 C 16 D 20 


© UCLES 2018 0610/12/F/M/18 **[Turn over** 

**25** The table shows the percentage of pregnancies in four groups of women. Each group used a different method of contraception. 

 method of contraception 

 percentage of pregnancies 

 the contraceptive pill 1 

 monitoring body temperature 14 

 diaphragm 7 

 male sterilisation (vasectomy) 0 

 Which contraceptive method was the least effective? 

 A barrier 

 B chemical 

 C natural 

 D surgical 

**26** Which sex chromosomes in the egg and the sperm will produce a male child? 

 sex chromosome in egg 

 sex chromosome in sperm 

 A X X 

 B X Y 

 C Y X 

 D Y Y 

**27** Cell division has the following functions. 

 1 asexual reproduction 

 2 growth 

 3 production of gametes 

 4 repair of damaged tissue 

 5 replacement of cells 

 Which functions are specific to mitosis? 

 A 1, 2, 3 and 4 

 B 1, 2, 4 and 5 

 C 2, 3 and 4 only 

 D 3, 4 and 5 only 


© UCLES 2018 0610/12/F/M/18 

**28** The chart shows the inheritance of fur colour in a small mammal. 

 If the allele for white fur is dominant, which animal must be heterozygous for the gene controlling fur colour? 

## × 

## × 

## A B 

## C 

## D 

**29** Four phenotypes of a group of people were studied. 

 Which phenotype will show discontinuous variation? 

 A blood group 

 B foot size 

 C height 

 D weight 

**30** Which statement about selective breeding is correct? 

 A It does not involve humans. 

 B It involves a struggle for survival. 

 C It always involves one parent. 

 D It involves parents that possess desirable features. 


© UCLES 2018 0610/12/F/M/18 **[Turn over** 

**31** Which diagram shows how energy flows through an ecosystem? 

 A 

 Sun 

## B 

## C 

 Sun 

 Sun 

## D 

 Sun 

**32** The diagram shows part of a food web. 

 sandpipers 

 mites insects 

 spiders 

 plants 

 mink 

 geese 

 Which members of the food web are examples of producers, herbivores and carnivores? 

 producers herbivores carnivores 

 A insects sandpipers mink 

 B geese mites sandpipers 

 C plants geese spiders 

 D plants sandpipers insects 


© UCLES 2018 0610/12/F/M/18 

**33** The diagram shows part of the carbon cycle. 

 Which process reduces the carbon dioxide content of the atmosphere? 

 carbon dioxide in atmosphere 

 industry and power 

 transport animals plants 

 fossil fuels (coal and oil) decomposers 

## B 

## C 

## D 

## A 

**34** Which factor will cause a decrease in population size? 

 A decreased food supply 

 B decreased predation 

 C decreased disease 

 D decreased death rate 

**35** Some of the characteristics of bacteria are listed. 

 1 can make complex molecules 

 2 can reproduce quickly 

 3 have cytoplasm 

 4 may cause diseases 

 Which characteristics make bacteria useful in biotechnology and genetic engineering? 

 A 1, 2, 3 and 4 B 1 and 2 only C 2 and 3 only D 3 and 4 only 

**36** What is a product of anaerobic respiration in yeast? 

 A biological washing powders 

 B ethanol 

 C fruit juice 

 D human insulin 


© UCLES 2018 0610/12/F/M/18 

**37** Which statement about genetic engineering is correct? 

 A It involves choosing which individual organisms are used for breeding. 

 B It is always done using genes from the same species. 

 C It produces a new combination of genes. 

 D It produces exact copies of individual organisms. 

**38** Deforestation has undesirable effects on the environment. 

 Which effect makes the greatest contribution to global warming? 

 A extinction of species 

 B increased carbon dioxide 

 C increased flooding 

 D loss of soil by erosion 

**39** Methane is a gas that contributes to the greenhouse effect. 

 Which human activity is a source of methane? 

 A deforestation 

 B growing rice 

 C using fertilisers 

 D using herbicides 

**40** Which stage in the treatment of sewage removes large floating objects, such as plastic bags? 

 A aeration 

 B discharge 

 C screening 

 D sedimentation 


## BLANK PAGE 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2018 0610/12/F/M/18 


