 This document consists of 9 printed pages and 3 blank pages. 

 IB18 03_0455_12/3RP © UCLES 2018 [Turn over 

# *4884143356 

# * 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## ECONOMICS 0455/12 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice February/March 2018 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are thirty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. 


**1** What **best** describes the problem of scarcity? 

 A All consumer wants must be satisfied. 

 B All resources are free at the point of use. 

 C There are limited resources and unlimited wants. 

 D There are unlimited resources and limited wants. 

**2** What is an example of the purchase of a capital good? 

 A a farm owner purchasing additional land 

 B a farm owner purchasing a television 

 C a farm owner purchasing a tractor 

 D a farm worker purchasing some seeds 

**3** A student decides to buy a ticket for a concert instead of buying a new shirt. 

 What is the opportunity cost of buying the ticket? 

 A the concert 

 B the price of the ticket to the concert 

 C the shirt 

 D the time spent purchasing the ticket 

**4** In a market system who has the **most** important role in influencing the allocation of resources? 

 A consumers 

 B entrepreneurs 

 C government officials 

 D producers 


© UCLES 2018 0455/12/F/M/18 **[Turn over** 

**5** The diagram shows the market for oil. The initial equilibrium is X. 

 If the quantity of oil sold increased by two million barrels a day, which point represents the new equilibrium? 

 price 

 quantity 

## O 

## S 2 

## D 2 

## S 1 

## S 3 

## D 1 D 3 

## X 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 

**6** What is an external cost of mining coal? 

 A the cost of purchasing mining equipment 

 B the extra cleaning costs of local residents’ houses because of coal dust 

 C the extra cleaning costs of the mine buildings because of coal dust 

 D the cost to the mine owners to remove waste 

**7** The table shows the demand for chocolates at two different prices. 

 price $ 

 quantity demanded 

 0.50 400 

 0.45 480 

 What is the price elasticity of demand when the price falls from $0.50 to $0.45? 

 A less than 0.5 

 B between 0.5 and 1 

 C between 1 and 1.5 

 D greater than 1.5 


**8** What is a function of a stock exchange? 

 A It allows company shares to be traded. 

 B It enables tourists to purchase foreign currency. 

 C It provides a market for firms to sell their products. 

 D It sets the rate of interest in an economy. 

**9** What is a direct benefit to a worker of specialisation? 

 A the higher output that may lead to higher earnings 

 B the higher output that may lead to higher profits 

 C the higher output that may lead to lower costs per unit produced 

 D the longer training period that is required before starting work 

**10** A trade union succeeds in raising the wages in an industry above the equilibrium wage. 

 How would the demand and supply of labour change? 

 change in quantity of labour demanded 

 change in quantity of labour supplied 

 A fall fall 

 B fall rise 

 C rise fall 

 D rise rise 

**11** What is **most** likely to result from an increase in income tax? 

 A a fall in consumer spending 

 B a fall in government spending 

 C a rise in business investment 

 D a rise in the level of imports 

**12** Which statement explains why firms in perfect competition are **not** able to exploit consumers? 

 A The firms can restrict output. 

 B The products are differentiated. 

 C There are barriers to entry. 

 D There is perfect information. 


© UCLES 2018 0455/12/F/M/18 **[Turn over** 

**13** A company with a chain of restaurants bought another chain of restaurants. 

 How is this purchase most likely to be classified? 

 A conglomerate merger 

 B diversification 

 C horizontal integration 

 D vertical integration 

**14** The table shows some of the costs of running a retail shop in one week. 

## $ 

 rent of shop 200 

 insurance premium 40 

 purchase of stock 700 

 delivery of goods 50 

 What are the total fixed costs during this week? 

 A $200 B $240 C $700 D $750 

**15** A company’s annual report suggested that it had benefited from some changes. 

 Which change is an internal economy of scale for this company? 

 A an improvement in road and rail facilities that has reduced its distribution costs 

 B an increase in the number of local specialist workers that it could recruit 

 C the introduction of new training at a local college for which staff have enrolled 

 D the reduction in the company’s costs by the purchase of a factory supplying components 

**16** A government believes that consumption of a certain good will be of benefit to society. 

 Which policy is most likely to encourage producers to increase their output of that good? 

 A an increase in the period required for training the industry’s workers 

 B an increase in the regulations affecting businesses 

 C an increase in the subsidies for that good 

 D an increase in the taxation of that good 


**17** Which statement describes a progressive tax? 

 A a tax that has a higher percentage rate as income rises 

 B a tax that increases government income over time 

 C a tax that places an increasing burden on the poor 

 D a tax that rises in line with the rate of inflation 

**18** Which combination of government policies is **most** likely to reduce unemployment? 

 income tax rate 

 government spending 

 rate of interest 

 A decrease decrease increase 

 B decrease increase decrease 

 C increase decrease decrease 

 D increase increase increase 

**19** Which pair of government actions combines a fiscal policy with a supply-side policy? 

 A changing government spending with changing interest rates 

 B cutting tax rates with providing information on job vacancies 

 C limiting bank lending with the privatisation of industry 

 D restricting credit with less control over labour markets 

**20** What is a recession? 

 A a period when incomes rise by less than inflation 

 B a period when prices are falling continuously for twelve months 

 C a period when real GDP is declining for two consecutive quarters 

 D a period when unemployment is rising 

**21** An economy is suffering from a period of deflation. 

 What does this mean for the economy? 

 A Consumers may delay purchase of some products. 

 B Purchasing power of consumers falls. 

 C Tax revenues for the government will rise. 

 D The real value of personal savings falls. 


© UCLES 2018 0455/12/F/M/18 **[Turn over** 

**22** The table shows the percentage change in employment over a period for a country with three economic sectors. 

 economic sector 

 change in employment (%) 

 agriculture –6 

 manufacturing +2 

 services +4 

 What could be concluded from this information? 

 A Agricultural output fell. 

 B The country became more developed. 

 C The working population stayed constant. 

 D Total employment remained the same. 

**23** Official statistics in 2010 showed South Africa had a very high unemployment rate at around 25%, although wages were double those in Brazil. 

 What might be a reason for South Africa’s high wages in a time of high unemployment compared with Brazil? 

 A a skilled workforce in Brazil 

 B high levels of savings in South Africa 

 C more labour-intensive production in Brazil 

 D strong trade unions in South Africa 

**24** What is a common feature of developed countries? 

 A a high fertility rate 

 B a low population 

 C high net emigration 

 D low birth rates 


**25** Which combination of changes in a government’s budget will lead to greater income inequality? 

direct taxes indirect taxes (^) education spendinghealth and **A** decrease decrease increase **B** decrease increase decrease **C** increase decrease decrease **D** increase increase increase **26** The table shows the percentage of the working population in different sectors in three countries. country agriculture (%) manufacturing (%) services (%) Iran 38 33 29 Nepal 93 2 5 UK 2 42 56 What can be concluded from the table? **A** Iran has fewer people working in the secondary sector than the UK. **B** Nepal is a developed economy. **C** The tertiary sector is more developed in Iran than in Nepal. **D** The UK is dependent on the primary sector. **27** Which method of trade protection has the **most** predictable effect in controlling the level of imports? **A** quotas on imports **B** safety and quality regulations for imports **C** subsidies to domestic producers **D** tariffs on imports **28** What would cause a favourable change in the Indian trade in services (invisible) account? **A** A Japanese company invests in a subsidiary in India. **B** A large Indian company increases its exports of goods. **C** A Malaysian company increases its exports to India. **D** An Indian company wins a contract to transport South African exports. 


**29** In October 2015, one UK pound could be exchanged for 100 Indian rupees. By October 2016, one UK pound could be exchanged for 80 Indian rupees. 

 What would be a short-term consequence of this change? 

 A Economic growth in India would increase. 

 B Indian manufacturers would earn higher profits from exports to the UK. 

 C Inflationary pressure in the UK would reduce. 

 D UK manufacturers would find it easier to export to India. 

**30** A country imports oil which is used in the production and distribution of goods. The country has also experienced a rise in incomes which has resulted in a large increase in the demand for goods, some of which it imports. 

 What is likely to happen to the country’s balance of trade in goods (visible) and to the price of oil? 

 balance of trade in goods price of oil 

 A improves falls 

 B improves rises 

 C worsens falls 

 D worsens rises 


## BLANK PAGE 


## BLANK PAGE 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

## BLANK PAGE 


