 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 14 printed pages and 2 blank pages. 

 IB16 06_0610_13/3RP © UCLES 2016 [Turn over 

# *4851845816* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## BIOLOGY 0610/13 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) May/June 2016 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A, B, C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2016 0610/13/M/J/16 

1 Some yeast, sugar and water are mixed in a test-tube. The diagrams show the test-tube at the start and after one hour. 

 at start after one hour 

 yeast, sugar and water 

 bubbles of gas 

 Which process causes this change? 

 A growth 

 B reproduction 

 C respiration 

 D sensitivity 

2 Phototropism demonstrates which two characteristics of living organisms? 

 A growth and nutrition 

 B growth and sensitivity 

 C movement and nutrition 

 D nutrition and sensitivity 

3 The table shows the scientific names and the common names of four plants. 

 scientific name common name 

 Althea officinalis marsh mallow 

 Hottonea palustris water violet 

 Viola palustris marsh violet 

 Viola tricolor wild pansy 

 Which word in their names shows that two of the plants share the greatest number of features? 

 A marsh 

 B palustris 

 C Viola 

 D violet 


© UCLES 2016 0610/13/M/J/16 [Turn over 

4 What is the correct order of increasing size of the following structures, from smallest to largest? 

 A chromosome → liver → white blood cell 

 B chromosome → white blood cell → liver 

 C liver → chromosome → white blood cell 

 D white blood cell → liver → chromosome 

5 In a plant, what is formed by a group of xylem vessels? 

 A a cell 

 B a tissue 

 C an organ 

 D an organ system 

6 The shaded area of the diagram represents structures found in both plant and animal cells. 

 plantplant cellcell structuresstructures 

 animalanimal cellcell structuresstructures 

 plant cell structures 

 animal cell structures 

 Which cell structure is from the shaded area? 

 A cell membrane 

 B cell wall 

 C chloroplast 

 D large vacuole 


© UCLES 2016 0610/13/M/J/16 

7 A jar of air was placed upside down on top of a jar containing a brown gas as shown. 

 at start after one hour 

 air 

 brown gas 

 air and brown gas 

 Which process has taken place? 

 A diffusion both upwards and downwards 

 B diffusion downwards only 

 C diffusion upwards only 

 D diffusion and osmosis 

8 Which statement describes how young plants are supported? 

 A the pressure of water inside the cells pressing outwards on the cell membranes 

 B the pressure of water inside the cells pressing outwards on the cell walls 

 C the pressure of water passing from the roots through the phloem 

 D the pressure of water passing from the roots through the xylem 

9 Small molecules are used as the basic units in the synthesis of large food molecules. 

 Which statement is correct? 

 A Amino acids are basic units of carbohydrates. 

 B Fatty acids are basic units of glycogen. 

 C Glycerol is a basic unit of oils. 

 D Simple sugar is a basic unit of protein. 


© UCLES 2016 0610/13/M/J/16 [Turn over 

10 The diagram represents a chemical reaction. 

 reactants product 

## + 

 Which diagram represents the enzyme for this reaction? 

 A B C D 

11 Which graph shows the effect of temperature on the activity of an enzyme? 

 temperature / °C 

 enzyme activity 

**A** (^) **B** 

## C D 

## 0 50 100 

 enzyme activity 

## 0 50 100 

 temperature / °C 

 enzyme activity 

## 0 50 100 

 temperature / °C 

 enzyme activity 

## 0 50 100 

 temperature / °C 


© UCLES 2016 0610/13/M/J/16 

12 Four test-tubes are set up as shown in the diagram and left in full sunlight. 

 After several hours, which test-tube contains the most dissolved oxygen? 

 A B C D 

 water 

 snail 

 water 

 water 

 pond pond weed weed 

 water 

 snail 

13 In a photosynthesis experiment, a plant is left in bright sunlight for several hours. A leaf is then removed from the plant and tested for starch, using iodine solution. 

 The diagram shows the leaf from the plant that was used in the experiment. 

 white area 

 green area 

 Which diagram shows the result of the experiment? 

 A B C D 

 iodine solution turns blue / black 

 iodine solution stays brown 

 key 

14 Which organ produces amylase? 

 A gall bladder 

 B liver 

 C oesophagus 

 D pancreas 


© UCLES 2016 0610/13/M/J/16 [Turn over 

15 Which treatment is best for a person with persistent diarrhoea? 

 A drinking a solution of sugar and salt 

 B drinking pure water 

 C eating more fibre 

 D eating protein such as boiled eggs 

16 Which type of food is not digested before being absorbed by the body? 

 A carbohydrate 

 B fat 

 C protein 

 D water 

17 Which graph shows most clearly what will happen to the rate of transpiration as humidity increases? 

 humidity 

## A 

 rate of transpiration 

 rate of transpiration 

 rate of transpiration 

 rate of transpiration 

 humidity 

## B 

 humidity 

## C 

 humidity 

## D 


© UCLES 2016 0610/13/M/J/16 

18 The diagram shows a potted plant and the same plant 24 hours later. 

 24 hours 

 What causes the change in the appearance of the plant? 

 A Water loss is greater than water uptake. 

 B Water moves from the leaves to the stem. 

 C Water uptake is equal to water loss. 

 D Water uptake is greater than water loss. 

19 Which blood vessel has a high carbon dioxide concentration, a low oxygen concentration and a high blood pressure? 

 A aorta 

 B pulmonary artery 

 C pulmonary vein 

 D vena cava 

20 Which substances are dissolved in human blood plasma? 

 A carbon dioxide, haemoglobin and glucose 

 B carbon dioxide, oxygen and haemoglobin 

 C glucose, hormones and urea 

 D oxygen, urea and starch 

21 What is the path of carbon dioxide as it leaves the lungs? 

 A alveolus → bronchiole → bronchus → trachea 

 B alveolus → bronchus → bronchiole → trachea 

 C trachea → bronchiole → bronchus → alveolus 

 D trachea → bronchus → bronchiole → alveolus 


© UCLES 2016 0610/13/M/J/16 [Turn over 

22 In some amphibians, gas exchange occurs through the whole skin surface. 

 What are the most likely characteristics of the skin surface? 

 surface area type of skin 

 A large thick 

 B large thin 

 C small thick 

 D small thin 

23 Which description of anaerobic respiration in yeast is correct? 

 it produces alcohol 

 it releases more energy than aerobic respiration 

 A no no 

 B no yes 

 C yes no 

 D yes yes 

24 What is an example of excretion in mammals? 

 A the release of hormones from glands 

 B the release of saliva into the mouth 

 C the removal of undigested food through the anus 

 D the removal of urea by the kidneys 

25 A person has been sitting in a room at 35 °C for 30 minutes. 

 What would be the effect of then drinking several glasses of iced water? 

 blood temperature rate of sweating 

 A falls falls 

 B falls rises 

 C rises falls 

 D rises rises 


© UCLES 2016 0610/13/M/J/16 

26 The diagram represents a simple reflex arc. 

 finger 

## R 

## Q 

 spinal cord P 

 muscle pin 

 What is the sequence of nerve cells through which an impulse passes during a reflex action? 

 first last 

 A P Q R 

 B Q R P 

 C Q P R 

 D R P Q 

27 What is an example of gravitropism? 

 A a chemical messenger produced by a plant 

 B a painful sensation in response to a stimulus 

 C the growth of a plant root towards the centre of the Earth 

 D the growth of a plant shoot towards light 

28 Which organ produces a hormone? 

 A heart 

 B lung 

 C ovary 

 D spinal cord 


© UCLES 2016 0610/13/M/J/16 [Turn over 

29 What is a result of the excessive intake of alcohol? 

 A improved self-control 

 B liver damage 

 C reduced chance of HIV infection 

 D shorter reaction time 

30 The table shows the conditions provided for four sets of seeds. 

 Which of the seeds germinate? 

 oxygen water carbon dioxide 

 A    

 B    

 C    

 D    

31 The diagram shows a human female’s reproductive organs. 

## X 

 What is the name of structure X? 

 A cervix 

 B ovary 

 C oviduct 

 D ovule 


© UCLES 2016 0610/13/M/J/16 

32 Owners of successful race horses hope that the horses’ offspring will be like their parents. 

 How does a young race horse inherit its characteristics? 

 A equally from its mother and father 

 B mainly from its father 

 C mainly from its mother 

 D passed across the placenta 

33 In pea plants the allele for tall, T, is dominant to the allele for dwarf, t. 

 Which cross would produce plants in the proportion of 1 tall : 1 dwarf? 

 A TT × Tt B Tt × Tt C Tt × tt D tt × tt 

34 Which name is given to the observable features of an organism? 

 A alleles 

 B genes 

 C genotype 

 D phenotype 

35 Which characteristic shows discontinuous variation in humans? 

 A height 

 B length of foot 

 C tongue rolling 

 D weight 


© UCLES 2016 0610/13/M/J/16 [Turn over 

36 The graph shows the increase in the human population of the world since 1630. 

## 4000 

## 3000 

## 2000 

## 1000 

## 0 

## 5000 

## 6000 

## 1630 1730 1830 1930 2030 

 population / millions 

 year 

 What was the longest time taken for the population to double? 

 A 100 years B 200 years C 300 years D 400 years 

37 The diagram shows a food chain. 

 tree → small insects → small birds → birds of prey 

 What is the correct pyramid of numbers for this food chain? 

 birds of prey 

 small birds 

 small insects 

 tree 

## A B C D 

38 Which process is not part of the water cycle? 

 A condensation 

 B fossilisation 

 C precipitation 

 D transpiration 


© UCLES 2016 0610/13/M/J/16 

39 A gene for insulin is taken from a human cell and placed in a bacterium. 

 The bacterium can then make human insulin. 

 What is this process called? 

 A artificial selection 

 B genetic engineering 

 C heterozygous inheritance 

 D natural selection 

40 The diagram shows the positions of four farms and the concentrations of nitrate at different points in a river. 

 Which farm is likely to have been using too much fertiliser on its land? 

 farm A 

 farm B 

 farm D 

 farm C 

## 60 

## 40 

## 20 

## 0 

 nitrate concentration / ppm 

 direction of flow 

 direction of flow 


© UCLES 2016 0610/13/M/J/16 

## BLANK PAGE 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2016 0610/13/M/J/16 

## BLANK PAGE 


