 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. 

 IB16 06_0610_11/3RP © UCLES 2016 [Turn over 

# *9998858887* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## BIOLOGY 0610/11 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) May/June 2016 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A, B, C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2016 0610/11/M/J/16 

1 Some yeast, sugar and water are mixed in a test-tube. The diagrams show the test-tube at the start and after one hour. 

 at start after one hour 

 yeast, sugar and water 

 bubbles of gas 

 Which process causes this change? 

 A growth 

 B reproduction 

 C respiration 

 D sensitivity 

2 Which name is given to a group of individuals that can reproduce to produce fertile offspring? 

 A a genus 

 B a kingdom 

 C a species 

 D an organ system 

3 Use the key to identify the animal shown in the diagram. 

 has jointed legs 

 three pairs of legs 

 more than three pairs of legs 

 has tail 

## A 

 Hexagenia 

 no tail 

## B 

 Dytiscus 

 four pairs of legs 

## C 

 Argyroneta 

 more than four pairs of legs 

## D 

 Asellus 


© UCLES 2016 0610/11/M/J/16 [Turn over 

4 Which row matches the cell membrane and cell wall of a palisade cell to their functions? 

 cell membrane cell wall 

 A active transport active transport 

 B active transport support 

 C support active transport 

 D support support 

5 In a plant, what is formed by a group of xylem vessels? 

 A a cell 

 B a tissue 

 C an organ 

 D an organ system 

6 What are the functions of xylem vessels? 

 absorption conduction photosynthesis support 

 A     

 B     

 C     

 D     

7 Active transport is the movement of 

 A molecules from a region of their higher concentration to a region of their lower concentration. 

 B particles from a region of lower concentration to a region of higher concentration using energy from respiration. 

 C urine by relaxation of a sphincter muscle in the bladder. 

 D water through a partially permeable membrane from a more dilute to a more concentrated solution. 


© UCLES 2016 0610/11/M/J/16 

8 The diagram shows an experiment to demonstrate the movement of molecules. 

 red ink solution 

 permeable membrane attached to funnel 

 beaker of water 

 inverted thistle funnel 

 After one hour, the water in the beaker turned red. 

 What is the most likely reason for this colour change? 

 A Molecules of red ink move through the membrane by diffusion. 

 B Molecules of red ink move through the membrane by osmosis. 

 C Molecules of water move through the membrane by diffusion. 

 D Molecules of water move through the membrane by osmosis. 

9 Small molecules are used as the basic units in the synthesis of large food molecules. 

 Which statement is correct? 

 A Amino acids are basic units of carbohydrates. 

 B Fatty acids are basic units of glycogen. 

 C Glycerol is a basic unit of oils. 

 D Simple sugar is a basic unit of protein. 


© UCLES 2016 0610/11/M/J/16 [Turn over 

10 Which graph shows the effect of temperature on the activity of an enzyme? 

 temperature / °C 

 enzyme activity 

**A** (^) **B** 

## C D 

## 0 50 100 

 enzyme activity 

## 0 50 100 

 temperature / °C 

 enzyme activity 

## 0 50 100 

 temperature / °C 

 enzyme activity 

## 0 50 100 

 temperature / °C 

11 The diagram represents enzyme action. 

## + 

## W 

## + 

## X Y 

 What are parts W, X and Y in this chemical reaction? 

 enzyme product substrate 

 A W X Y 

 B X W Y 

 C X Y W 

 D Y W X 


© UCLES 2016 0610/11/M/J/16 

12 In a photosynthesis experiment, a plant is left in bright sunlight for several hours. A leaf is then removed from the plant and tested for starch, using iodine solution. 

 The diagram shows the leaf from the plant that was used in the experiment. 

 white area 

 green area 

 Which diagram shows the result of the experiment? 

 A B C D 

 iodine solution turns blue / black 

 iodine solution stays brown 

 key 

13 Which substance, needed for protein synthesis, is carried into a leaf from the stem? 

 A carbon dioxide 

 B nitrate 

 C oxygen 

 D starch 

14 Which type of food is not digested before being absorbed by the body? 

 A carbohydrate 

 B fat 

 C protein 

 D water 


© UCLES 2016 0610/11/M/J/16 [Turn over 

15 The diagram shows the human alimentary canal. 

 In which structure is most glucose absorbed into the blood? 

 A 

## B 

## C 

## D 

16 Which dietary component is unlikely to be deficient in a meat-free diet? 

 A fat 

 B fibre 

 C protein 

 D vitamin D 


© UCLES 2016 0610/11/M/J/16 

17 Which graph shows most clearly what will happen to the rate of transpiration as humidity increases? 

 humidity 

## A 

 rate of transpiration 

 rate of transpiration 

 rate of transpiration 

 rate of transpiration 

 humidity 

## B 

 humidity 

## C 

 humidity 

## D 

18 The diagram shows a potted plant and the same plant 24 hours later. 

 24 hours 

 What causes the change in the appearance of the plant? 

 A Water loss is greater than water uptake. 

 B Water moves from the leaves to the stem. 

 C Water uptake is equal to water loss. 

 D Water uptake is greater than water loss. 


© UCLES 2016 0610/11/M/J/16 [Turn over 

19 Which substances are dissolved in human blood plasma? 

 A carbon dioxide, haemoglobin and glucose 

 B carbon dioxide, oxygen and haemoglobin 

 C glucose, hormones and urea 

 D oxygen, urea and starch 

20 Which chamber of the heart has the thickest muscle wall? 

 A left atrium 

 B left ventricle 

 C right atrium 

 D right ventricle 

21 What is the approximate percentage of oxygen in expired air? 

 A 0.04% B 4% C 16% D 21% 

22 Compared with atmospheric air, air breathed out by a human contains 

 A less water vapour, less carbon dioxide. 

 B less water vapour, more carbon dioxide. 

 C more water vapour, less carbon dioxide. 

 D more water vapour, more carbon dioxide. 

23 What is produced by anaerobic respiration in yeast? 

 lactic acid carbon dioxide 

 A   

 B   

 C   

 D   

24 What is the word equation for aerobic respiration in plants? 

 A carbon dioxide + water → glucose + oxygen 

 B glucose + carbon dioxide → water + oxygen 

 C glucose + oxygen → carbon dioxide + water 

 D glucose + water → carbon dioxide + oxygen 


© UCLES 2016 0610/11/M/J/16 

25 Where is urea made? 

 A bladder 

 B kidney 

 C liver 

 D urethra 

26 The diagram represents a simple reflex arc. 

 finger 

## R 

## Q 

 spinal cord P 

 muscle pin 

 What is the sequence of nerve cells through which an impulse passes during a reflex action? 

 first last 

 A P Q R 

 B Q R P 

 C Q P R 

 D R P Q 


© UCLES 2016 0610/11/M/J/16 [Turn over 

27 The diagram shows a neurone. 

## X Y 

 Which structures could be found at X and Y? 

## X Y 

 A brain intestine 

 B brain leg 

 C eye hand 

 D gland spinal cord 

28 What will be the effect of strenuous exercise on the volume of water lost through the skin and the kidneys? 

 volume of water lost through the skin 

 volume of water lost through the kidneys 

 A decreases decreases 

 B decreases increases 

 C increases decreases 

 D increases increases 

29 Which organ is most often damaged by regularly drinking too much alcohol? 

 A heart 

 B liver 

 C pancreas 

 D stomach 

30 When a baby is born, these processes occur. 

 1 breaking of the amniotic sac 

 2 contraction of muscles in the uterus wall 

 3 cutting of the umbilical cord 

 In which order do these processes usually occur? 

 A 2 → 1 → 3 B 2 → 3 → 1 C 3 → 1 → 2 D 3 → 2 → 1 


© UCLES 2016 0610/11/M/J/16 

31 The diagrams show pollen grains from three different species of plant as they appear under the microscope. The diagrams are all to the same scale. 

 1 2 3 

 Which pollen grains are involved in insect-pollination? 

 A 1 and 2 B 1 only C 2 and 3 D 3 only 

32 The diagram shows the human female reproductive system. 

 If a woman uses a femidom as a contraceptive, where would it be placed? 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 


© UCLES 2016 0610/11/M/J/16 [Turn over 

33 Cells are formed by the division of existing cells. Four different cells are shown. 

 Which cell is produced by meiosis? 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 

34 Albinism is an inherited condition in which pigment does not develop in the skin, hair and eyes. 

 The allele for albinism is recessive. 

 What are the chances of albino parents having an albino child? 

 A 0% B 25% C 75% D 100% 

35 Which name is given to the observable features of an organism? 

 A alleles 

 B genes 

 C genotype 

 D phenotype 

36 What is not a feature of natural selection? 

 A competition for resources 

 B production of many offspring 

 C selection by humans 

 D variation within the population 


© UCLES 2016 0610/11/M/J/16 

37 The graph shows a population growth curve. 

 population size 

 time 

## X 

 Which factors would cause region X on the graph to become steeper? 

 A decrease in predation, decrease in food supply 

 B increase in food supply, decrease in disease 

 C increase in food supply, increase in predation 

 D increase in predation, decrease in disease 

38 The diagram shows a simple food chain. 

 green plant → herbivore → carnivore 

 If a disease causes the number of herbivores to decrease, what will be the effect on the numbers of green plants and carnivores? 

 green plants carnivores 

 A decrease decrease 

 B decrease increase 

 C increase decrease 

 D increase increase 

39 A gene for insulin is taken from a human cell and placed in a bacterium. 

 The bacterium can then make human insulin. 

 What is this process called? 

 A artificial selection 

 B genetic engineering 

 C heterozygous inheritance 

 D natural selection 


© UCLES 2016 0610/11/M/J/16 

40 The diagram shows the positions of four farms and the concentrations of nitrate at different points in a river. 

 Which farm is likely to have been using too much fertiliser on its land? 

 farm A 

 farm B 

 farm D 

 farm C 

## 60 

## 40 

## 20 

## 0 

 nitrate concentration / ppm 

 direction of flow 

 direction of flow 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2016 0610/11/M/J/16 

## BLANK PAGE 


