® IGCSE is the registered trademark of Cambridge International Examinations. 

 This syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 9 printed pages. 

© UCLES 2016 **[Turn over** 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

**PHYSICS 0625/42** 

Paper 4 Extended Theory **October/November 2016** 

MARK SCHEME 

Maximum Mark: 80 

 Published 

This mark scheme is published as an aid to teachers and candidates, to indicate the requirements of the examination. It shows the basis on which Examiners were instructed to award marks. It does not indicate the details of the discussions that took place at an Examiners’ meeting before marking began, which would have considered the acceptability of alternative answers. 

Mark schemes should be read in conjunction with the question paper and the Principal Examiner Report for Teachers. 

Cambridge will not enter into discussions about these mark schemes. 

Cambridge is publishing the mark schemes for the October/November 2016 series for most Cambridge IGCSE®^ , Cambridge International A and AS Level components and some Cambridge O Level components. 


 Page 2 Mark Scheme Syllabus Paper Cambridge IGCSE – October/November 2016 0625 42 

 © UCLES 2016 

## NOTES ABOUT MARK SCHEME SYMBOLS & OTHER MATTERS 

**M marks** are method marks upon which further marks depend. For an M mark to be scored, the point to which it refers **must** be seen in a candidate's answer. If a candidate fails to score a particular M mark, then none of the dependent marks can be scored. 

**B marks** are independent marks, which do not depend on other marks. For a B mark to scored, the point to which it refers must be seen specifically in the candidate’s answers. 

**A marks** In general A marks are awarded for final answers to numerical questions. 

 If a final numerical answer, eligible for A marks, is correct, with the correct unit and an acceptable number of significant figures, all the marks for that question are normally awarded. It is very occasionally possible to arrive at a correct answer by an entirely wrong approach. In these rare circumstances, do not award the A marks, but award C marks on their merits. However, correct numerical answers with no working shown gain all the marks available. 

**C marks** are compensatory marks in general applicable to numerical questions. These can be scored even if the point to which they refer are not written down by the candidate, **provided subsequent working gives evidence that they must have known it.** For example, if an equation carries a C mark and the candidate does not write down the actual equation but does correct substitution or working which shows he knew the equation, then the C mark is scored A C mark is not awarded if a candidate makes two points which contradict each other. Points which are wrong but irrelevant are ignored. 

**brackets ( )** around words or units in the mark scheme are intended to indicate wording used to clarify the mark scheme, but the marks do not depend on seeing the words or units in brackets. e.g. 10 (J) means that the mark is scored for 10, regardless of the unit given. 

**underlining** indicates that this must be seen in the answer offered, or something very similar. 

**OR / or** indicates alternative answers, any one of which is satisfactory for scoring the marks. 

**e.e.o.o.** means "each error or omission". 

**o.w.t.t.e.** means “or words to that effect”. 

**Spelling** Be generous about spelling and use of English. If an answer can be understood to mean what we want, give credit. However, beware of and do not allow ambiguities, accidental or deliberate: e.g. spelling which suggests confusion between reflection / refraction / diffraction / thermistor / transistor / transformer. 

**Not/NOT** Indicates that an incorrect answer is not to be disregarded, but cancels another otherwise correct alternative offered by the candidate, i.e. right plus wrong penalty applies. 


 Page 3 Mark Scheme Syllabus Paper Cambridge IGCSE – October/November 2016 0625 42 

 © UCLES 2016 

**Ignore** Indicates that something which is not correct or irrelevant is to be disregarded and does not cause a right plus wrong penalty. 

**ecf** meaning “error carried forward” is mainly applicable to numerical questions, but may in particular circumstances be applied in non-numerical questions. This indicates that if a candidate has made an earlier mistake and has carried an incorrect value forward to subsequent stages of working, marks indicated by ecf may be awarded, provided the subsequent working is correct, bearing in mind the earlier mistake. This prevents a candidate being penalised more than once for a particular mistake, but **only** applies to marks annotated ecf. 

**Sig. figs** Answers are normally acceptable to any number of significant figures ⩾ 2. Any exceptions to this general rule will be specified in the mark scheme. In general, accept numerical answers, which, if reduced to two significant figures, would be right. 

**Units** Deduct one mark for each incorrect or missing unit from **an answer that would otherwise gain all the marks available for that answer: maximum 1 per question.** No deduction is incurred if the unit is missing from the final answer but is shown correctly in the working. 

**Arithmetic errors** Deduct one mark if the **only** error in arriving at a final answer is clearly an arithmetic one. 

**Transcription** Deduct one mark if the only error in arriving at a final answer is because given or errors previously calculated data has clearly been misread but used correctly.. 

**Fractions** e.g. ½, ¼, 1/10 etc are only acceptable where specified. 

**Crossed out work** Work which has been crossed out **and not replaced but can easily be read,** should be marked as if it had not been crossed out. 

**Use of NR** (# key on the keyboard). Use this if the answer space for a question is completely blank or contains no readable words, figures or symbols. 


**Page 4** 

**Mark Scheme** 

**Syllabus** 

**Paper** 

 Cambridge IGCSE – October/November 2016 

## 0625 

## 42 

 © UCLES 2016 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 1(a)(i) 

 constant gradient OR straight line 

## B1 

 1(a)(ii) 

 calculation of gradient(a = 4 

 /^ 2 =) 2.0 m 

 /^ s 

 2 

## C1A1 

 1(a)(iii) 

 decreases 

 /^ becomes zero 

## B1 

 1(b) 

 area or s = (av)v x tuse of any triangle or trapezium(total distance = ) 54–66 

 (m) 

 (total distance = ) 58–62 

 m 

## C1C1C1 A1 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 2(a)(i) 

## (K.E. =) ½ 

 mv 

 2 

## B1 

 2(a)(ii) 

 scalar AND direction does not matter 

## B1 

 2(b)(i) 

 p = mv in any form OR mv(p= 200 

## × 

## 2.5 =) 500 

 kg 

 m 

 /^ s 

## C1A1 

 2(b)(ii) 

## 500 – (50 

## × 

 4.0) or 500 – 200 

 (v= 300 

## /^ 200 = ) 1.5 

 m 

 /^ s 

 (in) same direction (as original motion) 

## C1 A1 B1 

 2(b)(iii) 

 (during collision kinetic energy transferred to) elastic 

 /^ strain energy 

 (elastic) energy transferred to kinetic energy 

 or 

 returned to car(s) 

## M1A1 


**Page 5** 

**Mark Scheme** 

**Syllabus** 

**Paper** 

 Cambridge IGCSE – October/November 2016 

## 0625 

## 42 

 © UCLES 2016 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 3(a)(i) 

 vacuum 

 /^ mercury vapour 

## B1 

 3(a)(ii) 

 (arrowed) line between mercury surfaces 

## B1 

 3(a)(iii) 

 (distance stays the) same 

## B1 

 3(b)(i) 

## (760 – 15 =) 750 

 (mm 

 Hg) 

## B1 

 3(b)(ii) 

 p^1 

## V 

 1 

 = p 

## V 2 

 in any form OR p 2 

## V 1 

## /V 1 

 2 

 correct substitution of 12.0 and 4.0correct calculation of p 

 2 

 from cand’s p 

 1 

 and correct V 

 1 

 and V 

 2 

 (reading = 760 – 45 = 715 = ) 720 

 mm 

 Hg 

## C1C1 A1 B1 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 4(a) 

 (output) power = V 

## I^ 

 in any form OR V 

## I 

 (power = 240 

## × 

## 23 =) 5500 

## (W) 

 efficiency = output (power) 

 /^ input (power) 

 (efficiency = 5520 

 /^ 16 200 =) 0.34 or 34% 

## C1C1C1 A1 

 4(b) 

 chemical OR potential 

## B1 

 4(c) 

 relevant environmental pro or con, e.g. no 

 /^ less air pollution, no 

## /^ 

 less greenhouse gases OR visual 

## /^ 

 noise 

 impact 

 /^ pollution, injure birds, 

 deforestation, conserves non-renewablesrelevant economic pro or con, e.g. no fuel cost or expensive to install (compared to other types of generation) 

## B1 B1 


**Page 6** 

**Mark Scheme** 

**Syllabus** 

**Paper** 

 Cambridge IGCSE – October/November 2016 

## 0625 

## 42 

 © UCLES 2016 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 5(a)(i) 

 in ice, molecules in fixed positions ANDin water, positions change 

## B1 

 5(a)(ii) 

 in ice, molecules vibrate ANDin water, molecules move around (and vibrate) 

## B1 

 5(b)(i) 

 m 

 /^ ρ 

## OR 

 ρ 

 = m 

 /^ V in any form 

## (V = 51 

## 000/920 =) 55 

 m 

 3 

## C1A1 

 5(b)(ii) 

 mL OR Q = mL in any form(Q = 51 

## 000 

## × 

## 3.3 

## × 

## 10 

## 5 ) = 1.7 

## × 

## 10 

 10 

## J 

## C1A1 

 5(c) 

 thermocouple 

## B1 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 6(a)(i) 

 1 tick 4th box 

 NOT extra tick(s) 

## B1 

 6(a)(ii) 

 1 tick2ndbox 

 NOT extra tick(s) 

## B1 

 6(b) 

 1 tick 2nd box 

 NOT extra tick(s) 

## B1 

 6(c)(i) 

## 1300 

## ⩽ 

 v 

## ⩽ 

 1700 m 

 /^ s 

## B1 

 6(c)(ii) 

 v = f 

 λ 

 in any form OR ( 

 λ^ 

 =) v 

 /^ f 

 candidate’s (i) 

## /^12 

 000 evaluated 

## C1A1 

 6(d) 

 any 2 wavelengths same as original3 wave fronts curved AND concave up3 part circles, 2 emanating from gap,must reach about 45° each side of centre line 

## B1B1 B1 


**Page 7** 

**Mark Scheme** 

**Syllabus** 

**Paper** 

 Cambridge IGCSE – October/November 2016 

## 0625 

## 42 

 © UCLES 2016 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 7(a) 

 rectangle and diagonal line with end parallel tolength of rectangle 

## B1 

 7(b) 

 first 2 rows of D both 0last 2 rows of D both 1each row of column E logical OR of (column C and candidate’s column D) 

## B1B1B1 

 7(c) 

 two single inputs 0 AND 1two correct single outputs 1 AND 0 

## B1 B1 


**Page 8** 

**Mark Scheme** 

**Syllabus** 

**Paper** 

 Cambridge IGCSE – October/November 2016 

## 0625 

## 42 

 © UCLES 2016 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 8(a) 

 ultra-violet written above 

 /^ below ultrasound 

 radio written above 

## /^ 

 below earthquake 

## B1B1 

 8(b)(i) 

## 3.0 

## × 

## 10 

 8 

 m 

 /^ s 

## B1 

 8(b)(ii)1 

 n = 

# c 

 /v^ 

# c 

 of 

 in any form OR (n = ) 

# c 

 /v^ 

# c 

 of 

## 1.5 

## C1 A1 

 8(b)(ii)2 

 sin c = 1 

 /^ n in any form OR (c = )sin 

 –1 

## (1 

 /^ n) 

## 42º 

## C1 A1 

 8(b)(iii) 

 total internal reflection 

## B1 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 9(a) 

## 4.5 

## V 

## B1 

 9(b)(i) 

## 1 

## /^ R 

## = 1 

## /^ R 

## +1 1 

## /^ R 

 2 

## OR 

## R 

## R 1 

## / 2 

## (R 

 1+ 

## R 

## ) 2 

## (R =) 20 

## Ω 

## C1 A1 

 9(b)(ii) 

 adds 55 to candidate’s previous line 

## B1 

 9(b)(iii) 

## I = V 

## /^ 

 R in any form OR V 

## /^ R 

## (I = 4.5 

## /^ 75 =) 0.060 A 

## C1 A1 

 9(c)(i) 

 reference to 55 

## Ω 

 resistor 

## B1 

 9(c)(ii) 

 reference to 60 

## Ω 

 resistor 

## B1 


**Page 9** 

**Mark Scheme** 

**Syllabus** 

**Paper** 

 Cambridge IGCSE – October/November 2016 

## 0625 

## 42 

 © UCLES 2016 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 10(a) 

 proton 

 (+)e 

 neutron 

 zero 

 /^ neutral 

 /^ no 

## /^ 

 none 

 /^ nothing 

 α-particle 

 (+)2e 

 β-particle 

- e 

 γ-ray 

 zero 

 /^ neutral 

 /^ no 

## /^ 

 none 

 /^ nothing 

## B3 

 10(b)(i) 

 into page 

## B1 

 10(b)(ii) 

 clearly 180 

## °^ 

 from 

 b i 

## B1 

 10(b)(iii) 

 none 

## B1 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 11(a) 

## 9.6 

## × 

## 10 

## 8 / 

## 8 

## 1.2 

## × 

## 10 

 8 (atoms) 

## C1A1 

 11(b) 

## 160 – 16 OR 144(144 

 /^ 8 + 16 = 18 + 16 =) 34 counts 

 /^ minute 

## C1A1 


