® IGCSE is the registered trademark of Cambridge International Examinations. 

 This syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 11 printed pages. 

© UCLES 2016 **[Turn over** 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

**PHYSICS 0625/43** 

Paper 4 Extended Theory **October/November 2016** 

MARK SCHEME 

Maximum Mark: 80 

 Published 

This mark scheme is published as an aid to teachers and candidates, to indicate the requirements of the examination. It shows the basis on which Examiners were instructed to award marks. It does not indicate the details of the discussions that took place at an Examiners’ meeting before marking began, which would have considered the acceptability of alternative answers. 

Mark schemes should be read in conjunction with the question paper and the Principal Examiner Report for Teachers. 

Cambridge will not enter into discussions about these mark schemes. 

Cambridge is publishing the mark schemes for the October/November 2016 series for most Cambridge IGCSE®^ , Cambridge International A and AS Level components and some Cambridge O Level components. 


 Page 2 Mark Scheme Syllabus Paper Cambridge IGCSE – October/November 2016 0625 43 

 © UCLES 2016 

## NOTES ABOUT MARK SCHEME SYMBOLS & OTHER MATTERS 

**M marks** are method marks upon which further marks depend. For an M mark to be scored, the point to which it refers **must** be seen in a candidate's answer. If a candidate fails to score a particular M mark, then none of the dependent marks can be scored. 

**B marks** are independent marks, which do not depend on other marks. For a B mark to scored, the point to which it refers must be seen specifically in the candidate’s answers. 

**A marks** In general A marks are awarded for final answers to numerical questions. 

 If a final numerical answer, eligible for A marks, is correct, with the correct unit and an acceptable number of significant figures, all the marks for that question are normally awarded. It is very occasionally possible to arrive at a correct answer by an entirely wrong approach. In these rare circumstances, do not award the A marks, but award C marks on their merits. However, correct numerical answers with no working shown gain all the marks available. 

**C marks** are compensatory marks in general applicable to numerical questions. These can be scored even if the point to which they refer are not written down by the candidate, **provided subsequent working gives evidence that they must have known it.** For example, if an equation carries a C mark and the candidate does not write down the actual equation but does correct substitution or working which shows he knew the equation, then the C mark is scored A C mark is not awarded if a candidate makes two points which contradict each other. Points which are wrong but irrelevant are ignored. 

**brackets ( )** around words or units in the mark scheme are intended to indicate wording used to clarify the mark scheme, but the marks do not depend on seeing the words or units in brackets. e.g. 10 (J) means that the mark is scored for 10, regardless of the unit given. 

**underlining** indicates that this must be seen in the answer offered, or something very similar. 

**OR / or** indicates alternative answers, any one of which is satisfactory for scoring the marks. 

**e.e.o.o.** means "each error or omission". 

**o.w.t.t.e.** means “or words to that effect”. 

**Spelling** Be generous about spelling and use of English. If an answer can be understood to mean what we want, give credit. However, beware of and do not allow ambiguities, accidental or deliberate: e.g. spelling which suggests confusion between reflection / refraction / diffraction / thermistor / transistor / transformer. 

**Not/NOT** Indicates that an incorrect answer is not to be disregarded, but cancels another otherwise correct alternative offered by the candidate, i.e. right plus wrong penalty applies. 


 Page 3 Mark Scheme Syllabus Paper Cambridge IGCSE – October/November 2016 0625 43 

 © UCLES 2016 

**Ignore** Indicates that something which is not correct or irrelevant is to be disregarded and does not cause a right plus wrong penalty. 

**ecf** meaning “error carried forward” is mainly applicable to numerical questions, but may in particular circumstances be applied in non-numerical questions. This indicates that if a candidate has made an earlier mistake and has carried an incorrect value forward to subsequent stages of working, marks indicated by ecf may be awarded, provided the subsequent working is correct, bearing in mind the earlier mistake. This prevents a candidate being penalised more than once for a particular mistake, but **only** applies to marks annotated ecf. 

**Sig. figs** Answers are normally acceptable to any number of significant figures ⩾ 2. Any exceptions to this general rule will be specified in the mark scheme. In general, accept numerical answers, which, if reduced to two significant figures, would be right. 

**Units** Deduct one mark for each incorrect or missing unit from **an answer that would otherwise gain all the marks available for that answer: maximum 1 per question.** No deduction is incurred if the unit is missing from the final answer but is shown correctly in the working. 

**Arithmetic errors** Deduct one mark if the **only** error in arriving at a final answer is clearly an arithmetic one. 

**Transcription** Deduct one mark if the only error in arriving at a final answer is because given or errors previously calculated data has clearly been misread but used correctly.. 

**Fractions** e.g. ½, ¼, 1/10 etc are only acceptable where specified. 

**Crossed out work** Work which has been crossed out **and not replaced but can easily be read,** should be marked as if it had not been crossed out. 

**Use of NR** (# key on the keyboard). Use this if the answer space for a question is completely blank or contains no readable words, figures or symbols. 


**Page 4** 

**Mark Scheme** 

**Syllabus** 

**Paper** 

 Cambridge IGCSE – October/November 2016 

## 0625 

## 43 

 © UCLES 2016 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 1(a) 

 ( a 

## = ) 

## ∆ 

 v^ 

 /^ t 

 or 

 gradient 

 0.50/2.00.25 m 

 /^ s 

 2 

## C1C1 A1 

 1(b)(i) 

 decreasing gradient fromgradient zero at end 

 and 

 joins first part smoothly 

## B1B1 

 1(b)(ii) 

 deceleration 

 or 

 retardation 

## B1 

 Total 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 2(a) 

 (moment = ) 

## F 

## × 

 x 

 ⊥ r 

 or 

## F 

## × 

 x 

 or 

## ^400 

## × 

## 1.2 

 or 

## ^500 

## × 

## 1.2 

 or 

## ^480 

 or 

## ^600 

## 600 

 and 

## ^480 

## 120 

## N 

 m 

 anticlockwise 

## C1C1A1B1 

 2(b)(i) 

## 1080 

## /^1100 

## N 

 m 

## B1 

 2(b)(ii) 

## 100 

## N 

## B1 

 Total 


**Page 5** 

**Mark Scheme** 

**Syllabus** 

**Paper** 

 Cambridge IGCSE – October/November 2016 

## 0625 

## 43 

 © UCLES 2016 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 3(a)(i) 

 a vector quantity 

 /^ it has 

 direction 

## B1 

 3(a)(ii) 

 vector 

 and 

 has direction/is related to velocity 

## B1 

 3(b)(i) 

 (p = )mv 

 or 

## ^35 

## × 

## 1200 

## 4.2 

## × 

## 10 

 4 kg 

 m 

 /^ s ( 

 or 

## N 

 s) 

## C1A1 

 3(b)(ii) 

 (K.E. = )½mv 

 2 

 or 

## ½ 

## × 

## 35 

## × 

## 1200 

 2 

## 2.5(2) 

## × 

## 10 

## 7 J 

## C1A1 

 3(c)(i) 

 constant 

 /^ unchanged 

## /^ 

 conserved 

## B1 

 3(c)(ii) 

 increaseschemical 

 /^ fuel energy transformed to kinetic energy 

## B1B1 

 Total 


**Page 6** 

**Mark Scheme** 

**Syllabus** 

**Paper** 

 Cambridge IGCSE – October/November 2016 

## 0625 

## 43 

 © UCLES 2016 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 4(a)(i) 

 (p = ) 

 hρ 

 g^ 

 or 

## 0.36 

## × 

## 840 

## × 

## 10 

## 3.0(24) 

## × 

## 10 

 3 Pa 

## C1A1 

 4(a)(ii) 

## 1.0(2024) 

## × 

## 10 

 5 Pa ( 

 allow 

## 1.0 

## × 

## 10 

 5 Pa 

 with evidence of addition 

## )^ 

## B1 

 4(b)(i) 

 left level not as lowright level not as high or one level higher 

 and 

 one level lower 

 smaller 

 h 

 /^ height (difference) 

## B1B1 

 4(b)(ii) 

 both 

 /^ liquid levels higher 

 same 

## /^ 0.36 

 m 

 h 

## /^ 

 height (difference) 

## B1B1 

 Total 


**Page 7** 

**Mark Scheme** 

**Syllabus** 

**Paper** 

 Cambridge IGCSE – October/November 2016 

## 0625 

## 43 

 © UCLES 2016 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 5(a)(i) 

 speed increases 

 or 

 kinetic energy increases 

## B1 

 5(a)(ii) 

 effect: density 

 /^ it increases 

 explanation: 

 (separation) decreases 

 and 

 less (kinetic) energy 

 /^ vibrate less 

 /^ smaller volume 

## B1B1 

 5(b)(i) 

## ( Q 

## = ) 

 m 

 l^ or 

## 0.12 

## × 

## 3.3 

## × 

## 10 

 5 

## 3.96 

## /^ 4.0 

## × 

## 10 

 4 

## ( P 

## = ) 

## Q 

 /^ t 

 or 

 m 

 l^ / 

 t^ 

 or 

## 3.96 

## × 

## 10 

## 4 / 

## 220 

 ign. 

## WD 

 /^ t 

## 180 

## W 

## C1C1C1A1 

 5(b)(ii) 

 thermal energy lost to something specific (air, road, surroundings) or 

 thermal radiation reflected 

## B1 

 Total 


**Page 8** 

**Mark Scheme** 

**Syllabus** 

**Paper** 

 Cambridge IGCSE – October/November 2016 

## 0625 

## 43 

 © UCLES 2016 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 6(a)(i) 

 same wavelengths (as original) 

 and 

 three crests (or more) 

 sensible curvature at top and bottom (not touching wall)straight line section in middle 

## B1B1B1 

 6(a)(ii) 

 Innermost curve beyond guidelines 

 and 

 same wavelength 

## B1 

 6(b) 

 type of wave 

 longitudinal wave 

 transverse wave 

 electromagnetic wave 

## 9 

 P-wave 

## 9 

# } 

 S-wave 

## 9 

 sound wave 

## 9 

# } 

 ultrasound wave 

## 9 

## B1 B1 B1 

 Total 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 7(a)(i) 

## 3.0 

## × 

## 10 

 8 

 m 

 /^ s 

## B1 

 7(a)(ii) 

 radio (waves) 

## B1 

 7(a)(iii) 

 infra-red (radiation)X-rays 

 or 

 Röntgen rays 

## B1B1 

 7(b)(i) 

 less energy wasted 

 or 

 danger (to people nearby)/harmful 

## B1 

 7(b)(ii) 

 satellite communication 

 /^ television 

 or 

 mobile 

 /^ cell 

 telephones 

 or 

 other sensible use (e.g. radar) 

## B1 

 Total 


**Page 9** 

**Mark Scheme** 

**Syllabus** 

**Paper** 

 Cambridge IGCSE – October/November 2016 

## 0625 

## 43 

 © UCLES 2016 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 8(a) 

 ( c 

 = )sin 

 –1 

## (1/ 

 n ) 

 or 

 sin 

 –1 

## (1/1.5) 

 or 

 sin 

 –1 

## (0.6667) 

 or 

 n = 1/sin( 

 c ) 42(41.8103)° 

## C1A1 

 8(b)(i) 

 (all of the) same 

 /^ one frequency 

 /^ wavelength 

## B1 

 8(b)(ii) 

 ( r 

 = )sin 

 –1 

 (sin( 

 i )^ 

 /^ n 

 )^ or 

 sin 

 –1 

 (sin(45(°)) 

## /^ 1.5) 

 n 

 = sin ( 

 i )^ 

 /^ sin( 

 r ) 

 or 

 1.5 = sin(45°) 

 /^ sin( 

 r ) 

 or 

 sin( 

 r ) = 0.47(140) 

## 28(.1255057)° 

 or 

## 28°/27.63930015° 

## C1 A1 

 8(b)(iii) 

 reflected ray 

 and 

 refracted ray at correct angles 

## B1 

 Total 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 9(a) 

 6 (cells) 

## B1 

 9(b)(i) 

## 48 

## Ω 

## B1 

 9(b)(ii) 

## 1 

## /^ R 

## = 1 

## /^ R 

 1 

## + 1 

## /^ R 

 2 

 or 

## ^1 

## /^ 48 + 1 

## /^24 

 or 

## ( 

## R 

## = ) 

## R 

## R 1 

## / 2 

## R 

## + 1 

## R 

 2 

 or 

## 24 × 48 

## /^72 

## 16 

## Ω 

## C1 A1 

 9(c)(i) 

## ( I 

## = ) 

## V 

## /^ R 

 or 

## ^12 

## /^ 

## 48 

## 0.25 A 

## C1 A1 

 9(c)(ii) 

## ( Q 

## = ) 

 /^ t 

 or 

## 0.25 

## × 

## 6.0 

 or 

## 0.25 

## × 

## 6.0 

## × 

## 60 

 or 

## 1.5 

## 90 

## C 

## C1A1 

 Total 


**Page 10** 

**Mark Scheme** 

**Syllabus** 

**Paper** 

 Cambridge IGCSE – October/November 2016 

## 0625 

## 43 

 © UCLES 2016 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 10(a)(i) 

 experiences force to left or right 

 or 

 moves to left or right 

 moves to right 

 or 

 bows out to right 

## C1A1 

 10(a)(ii) 

 vibrates (to left and right) 

 or 

 moves left and right repeatedly 

## B1 

 10(b)(i) 

 (magnetic) field (lines) cute.m.f. induced 

## B1B1 

 10(b)(ii) 

 opposite deflection 

 or 

 current reversed 

 same size deflection 

 /^ current 

## B1B1 

 10(b)(iii) 

 small(er) deflection 

 /^ current (in same direction) 

## B1 

 Total 


**Page 11** 

**Mark Scheme** 

**Syllabus** 

**Paper** 

 Cambridge IGCSE – October/November 2016 

## 0625 

## 43 

 © UCLES 2016 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 11(a)(i) 

 Fe 5626 

 ;^ both 

 numbers correct and in correct position 

## B1 

 11(a)(ii) 

 Pt 19678 

## ;^ 

## 78 

 and 

 Pt correct position 

 196 in correct position 

## B1B1 

 11(b)(i) 

## (^ 

 Pu 23894 

## → 

## ) 

## U 

 23492 

## + 

 4 α 2 

## ;^ 

## 4 

 and 

 2 in correct position by the 

 α 

 92 in correct position by the U234 in correct position by the U 

## B1B1B1 

 11(b)(ii) 

 270/90 half-lives 

 or 

 3 half-lives 

 or 

## ^1 

## /^8 

## 1.2 

## × 

## 10 

 10 

 or 

## 9.6 

## × 

## 10 

 10 

## – 1.2 

## × 

## 10 

 10 

 or 

## ^7 

## /^8 

## 8.4 

## × 

## 10 

 10 

## C1C1A1 

 Total 


