 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 16 printed pages. 

 IB16 11_0625_21/8RP © UCLES 2016 [Turn over 

# *2117549282* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## PHYSICS 0625/21 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) October/November 2016 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. Take the weight of 1.0 kg to be 10 N (acceleration of free fall = 10 m / s 2 ). 


© UCLES 2016 0625/21/O/N/16 

**1** The graph shows how the distance travelled by a vehicle changes with time. 

## 0 

## 0 

 distance 

 time 

## P 

## Q R 

## S 

 Which row describes the speed of the vehicle in each section of the graph? 

 P to Q Q to R R to S 

 A constant zero constant 

 B constant zero decreasing 

 C increasing constant decreasing 

 D increasing zero constant 

**2** A stone falls freely from the top of a cliff. Air resistance may be ignored. 

 Which graph shows how the acceleration of the stone varies with time as it falls? 

## 0 

 0 time 

 acceleration 

## A 

## 0 

 0 time 

 acceleration 

## B 

## 0 

 0 time 

 acceleration 

## C 

## 0 

 0 time 

 acceleration 

## D 


© UCLES 2016 0625/21/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**3** A car travels along a horizontal road in a straight line. The driver presses the accelerator to increase the speed of the car. 

 The speed-time graph for the car is shown. 

 30 

## 20 

## 10 

## 0 

## 0 5 10 15 20 

 speed m / s 

 time / s 

 What is the acceleration of the car? 

 A 0.50 m / s^2 B 1.00 m / s^2 C 1.50 m / s^2 D 2.00 m / s^2 

**4** A spaceship approaches the Earth from deep space. Near the Earth, a force on the spaceship causes it to have weight. This causes it to change its speed and direction. 

 Which type of force causes the spaceship’s weight, and which property of the spaceship resists its change in speed and direction? 

 force that causes weight 

 property that resists change in speed and direction 

 A gravitational mass 

 B gravitational volume 

 C magnetic mass 

 D magnetic volume 


© UCLES 2016 0625/21/O/N/16 

**5** The diagrams show an empty rectangular box, and the same box filled with liquid. 

 The box has a mass of 60 g when empty. When filled with liquid, the total mass of the box and the liquid is 300 g. 

 box filled with liquid 300 g 

 empty box 60 g 

 The density of the liquid is 1.2 g / cm^3. 

 What is the volume of the liquid in the box? 

 A 50 cm^3 B 200 cm^3 C 250 cm^3 D 300 cm^3 

**6** An object travels in a circular path at constant speed. 

 Which statement about the object is correct? 

 A It has changing kinetic energy. 

 B It has changing momentum. 

 C It has constant velocity. 

 D It is not accelerating. 

**7** Which diagram shows the magnitude and direction of the resultant _R_ of the two forces _F_ 1 and _F_ 2? 

## F 1 

## F 2 

## B 

## F 1 

## F 2 

## R R 

## A 

## F 1 

## F 2 

## R 

## C 

## R 

## F 1 

## F 2 

## D 


© UCLES 2016 0625/21/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**8** Two cars, P and Q, have different masses and different speeds as shown. 

 speed 20 m / s 

 mass 500 kg 

 car P 

 speed 10 m / s 

 mass 1000 kg 

 car Q 

 Which row correctly compares the momentum and the kinetic energy of P with the momentum and the kinetic energy of Q? 

 momentum kinetic energy 

 A P greater than Q P equal to Q 

 B P equal to Q P equal to Q 

 C P equal to Q P less than Q 

 D P less than Q P greater than Q 

**9** A car of mass 800 kg travels over a hill of height _h_. 

 h 

 hill 

 NOT TO SCALE 

 By travelling to the top of the hill, the car gains 40 000 J of gravitational potential energy. 

 The gravitational field strength g is 10 N / kg. 

 What is the height h of the hill? 

 A 5.0 m B 20 m C 50 m D 500 m 

**10** A lamp has a power input of 5.0 W. It wastes 1.0 W of power heating the surroundings. 

 What is the efficiency of the lamp? 

 A 20% B 50% C 80% D 120% 

**11** The box contains the names of eight different energy resources. 

 natural gas geothermal solar waves 

 hydroelectric oil wind coal 

 How many of these energy resources are renewable? 

 A 3 B 4 C 5 D 6 


© UCLES 2016 0625/21/O/N/16 

**12** The diagram shows a dam holding back water. 

 dam 

 65 m water 

 The depth of the water is 65 m. 

 The density of the water is 1000 kg / m^3. The gravitational field strength g is 10 N / kg. 

 What is the pressure exerted at the base of the dam due to the water? 

 A 15.4 Pa B 154 Pa C 65 000 Pa D 650 000 Pa 

**13** Air is trapped in a cylinder by a piston. The original volume of the trapped air is _V_ and the original pressure of the trapped air is _P_. The piston is pushed to the left. The temperature of the gas does not change. 

## 25 50 25 50 

 trapped air 

 before piston is pushed in after piston is pushed in 

 piston cylinder 

 trapped air 

 What is the new volume and what is the new pressure of the trapped air? 

 new volume new pressure 

 A^2 V^ P 2 

## B 2 V 2 P 

## C^ V 2^ P 2 

## D^ V 2^^2 P 


© UCLES 2016 0625/21/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**14** When a liquid evaporates, some of its molecules escape from the surface and the temperature of the liquid changes. 

 Which row describes the escaping molecules and the change in temperature of the liquid? 

 escaping molecules temperature ofthe liquid 

 A less energetic goes down 

 B less energetic goes up 

 C more energetic goes down 

 D more energetic goes up 

**15** A gas at a constant temperature is in a container of fixed volume. The gas exerts a pressure on the walls of the container. The pressure is caused by the gas molecules striking the walls. 

 Which statement about the gas molecules when they strike the walls is correct? 

 A The average kinetic energy of the gas molecules changes. 

 B The average momentum of the gas molecules changes. 

 C The average speed of the gas molecules changes. 

 D The chemical energy of the gas molecules changes. 

**16** A piece of melting ice at 0 °C and a beaker of boiling water are both in a laboratory. The laboratory is at 20 °C. 

 melting ice 

 boiling water 

 Bunsen burner heating water 

 What is happening to the temperature of the melting ice and what is happening to the temperature of the boiling water? 

 temperature of melting ice 

 temperature of boiling water 

 A constant constant 

 B constant increasing 

 C increasing constant 

 D increasing increasing 


© UCLES 2016 0625/21/O/N/16 

**17** The diagram shows a liquid-in-glass thermometer. 

## –10 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 

## °C 

 liquid thread 

 glass bulb stem 

 liquid 

 tube 

 Which feature would give a thermometer with an increased range? 

 A a smaller internal diameter of the tube containing the liquid thread 

 B a thinner glass bulb 

 C a larger length of the tube and stem 

 D a larger volume of the liquid 

**18** A copper container of mass 0.20 kg contains 0.10 kg of water. 

 The specific heat capacity of copper is 385 J / (kg °C) and the specific heat capacity of water is 4200 J / (kg °C). 

 How much energy, in joules, is needed to raise the temperature of the copper container and the water by 10 °C? 

 A (0.20 × 385 × 10) – (0.10 × 4200 × 10) 

 B (0.20 × 385 × 10) + (0.10 × 4200 × 10) 

**C** (0.10 + 0.20) × (^)  

#  

#  

#  

#  

#  + 

## 2 

## 4200 385 

## × 10 

## D (0.10 + 0.20) × (4200 + 385) × 10 

**19** The thermal transfer of energy through a copper rod involves electrons. A second process is also involved. 

 What is this method of thermal energy transfer, and what is the second process? 

 method second process 

 A conduction density change 

 B conduction lattice vibration 

 C convection density change 

 D convection lattice vibration 


© UCLES 2016 0625/21/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**20** The diagrams show four spherical objects at the same temperature. Two of the objects are small and two are large. Two of the objects are white and two are black. 

 Which object emits infra-red radiation at the greatest rate? 

 A B C D 

**21** The diagram represents plane wavefronts being diffracted by passing through a gap in a barrier. 

 barrier 

 wavefronts 

 gap 

 Which pair of changes must increase the amount of diffraction that occurs? 

 A decrease the wavelength and decrease the size of the gap 

 B decrease the wavelength and increase the size of the gap 

 C increase the wavelength and decrease the size of the gap 

 D increase the wavelength and increase the size of the gap 

**22** An image is formed by a plane mirror. A second image is formed by a lens used as a magnifying glass. 

 Which row states the nature of each of these images? 

 plane mirror magnifying glass 

 A real real 

 B real virtual 

 C virtual real 

 D virtual virtual 


© UCLES 2016 0625/21/O/N/16 

**23** Light travelling at a speed of 3.0 × 10 8 m / s strikes the surface of a glass block and undergoes refraction as it enters the block. 

 The diagram shows a ray of this light before and after it enters the block. 

## 33° 

## 55° 

 glass block 

 What is the speed of light in the glass? 

 A 1.8 × 10 8 m / s 

 B 2.0 × 10 8 m / s 

 C 4.5 × 10 8 m / s 

 D 5.0 × 10 8 m / s 

**24** Radiation from which part of the electromagnetic spectrum is used in the remote controller for a television? 

 A infra-red waves 

 B microwaves 

 C radio waves 

 D ultraviolet waves 

**25** A girl notices that, when she shouts into a cave, she hears an echo. 

 Which wave property causes the echo? 

 A diffraction 

 B dispersion 

 C reflection 

 D refraction 


© UCLES 2016 0625/21/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**26** The diagrams represent the displacement in four different sound waves. All the diagrams are drawn to the same scale. 

 Which diagram represents the sound with the highest pitch? 

 A B 

## C D 

 time time 

 time time 

 displacement 

 displacement 

 displacement 

 displacement 

## 0 

## 0 

## 0 

## 0 

## 0 

## 0 

## 0 

## 0 

**27** A student suggests three methods for demagnetising a piece of steel. 

 1 placing it in an east-west direction and hammering it hard 

 2 placing it in an east-west direction and heating it until red hot 

 3 removing it slowly from a coil carrying alternating current 

 Which of the methods will demagnetise the piece of steel? 

 A 1 only B 2 only C 3 only D 1, 2 and 3 


© UCLES 2016 0625/21/O/N/16 

**28** In two separate experiments, a magnet is brought near to an unmagnetised iron bar. This causes the bar to become magnetised. 

 N magnet S X iron bar 

 S magnet N iron bar Y 

 experiment 1 

 experiment 2 

 Which magnetic pole is induced at X and at Y? 

 pole induced at X pole induced at Y 

 A N N 

 B N S 

 C S N 

 D S S 

**29** A polythene rod is rubbed with a cloth. The rod becomes positively charged because of the movement of charged particles. 

 Which row gives the name of these charged particles, and the direction in which they move? 

 charged particles 

 direction of movement 

 A electrons from cloth to rod 

 B electrons from rod to cloth 

 C protons from cloth to rod 

 D protons from rod to cloth 


© UCLES 2016 0625/21/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**30** The diagram shows a lamp in a circuit. 

## P 

 Which change to the circuit would increase the current in the lamp? 

 A adding another resistor in parallel with the one in the circuit 

 B adding another resistor in series with the one in the circuit 

 C decreasing the electromotive force (e.m.f.) of the battery in the circuit 

 D moving the lamp to point P in the circuit 

**31** A 12.0 Ω resistor and a 6.0 Ω resistor are connected in parallel. 

 Another 6.0 Ω resistor is then connected in series with the parallel combination. 

## 6.0 Ω 

## 12.0 Ω 

## 6.0 Ω 

 What is the combined resistance of all three resistors? 

 A 8.0 Ω B 10 Ω C 15 Ω D 24 Ω 

**32** The circuit shows a 12 V battery connected to a lamp of resistance 3.0 Ω. 

 12 V 

 How much energy is transferred to the surroundings by the lamp in 2.0 minutes? 

 A 48 J B 96 J C 2880 J D 5760 J 


© UCLES 2016 0625/21/O/N/16 

**33** The diagram shows a circuit containing a battery, a resistor with high resistance, a switch and a lamp. 

 12 V battery 

## 12 V 

 resistor lamp 

 Initially the switch is open. 

 What happens to the lamp when the switch is closed? 

 A It glows more brightly. 

 B It glows less brightly. 

 C It goes out. 

 D Its brightness does not change. 

**34** This is the truth table for a logic gate. 

 input 1 input 2 output 

 0 0 1 

 0 1 1 

 1 0 1 

 1 1 0 

 Which symbol represents the logic gate? 

 A B C D 

**35** Why is a fuse used in an electrical circuit? 

 A so that the current can have only one value 

 B to prevent the current becoming too large 

 C to provide a path to earth if a fault occurs 

 D to save electrical energy 


© UCLES 2016 0625/21/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**36** An electric current can produce a heating effect and a magnetic effect. 

 Which row shows the effect that a relay uses and one application of a relay? 

 effect used by a relay one application of a relay 

 A heating effect allowing a small current to switch on a large current 

 B heating effect changing the voltage of an a.c. supply 

 C magnetic effect allowing a small current to switch on a large current 

 D magnetic effect changing the voltage of an a.c. supply 

**37** A very important experiment improved scientists’ understanding of the structure of matter. 

 The experiment involved α-particles being fired at a thin gold foil. 

 What happened? 

 A All the α-particles were absorbed by the nuclei of the gold atoms. 

 B All the α-particles were unaffected by the gold atoms. 

 C Some of the α-particles were attracted by the neutrons in the nuclei of the gold atoms. 

 D Some of the α-particles were repelled by the protons in the nuclei of the gold atoms. 

**38** What is meant by nuclear fusion? 

 A the emission of an electron from a nucleus 

 B the emission of two protons from a nucleus 

 C the joining together of two nuclei 

 D the splitting of a nucleus into two smaller nuclei 

**39** A nucleus undergoes radioactive decay. The proton number increases by one. The nucleon number does not change. 

 Which particle has been emitted in this decay? 

 A a neutron 

 B a proton 

 C an α-particle 

 D a β-particle 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2016 0625/21/O/N/16 

**40** Radioactive source S emits α-particles, β-particles and γ-rays. A detector is placed 5 cm away from S. A thin sheet of paper is placed as shown in the diagram. 

## S 

 5 cm 

 thin sheet of paper 

 detector 

 Which emissions from the source can be detected? 

 A α-particles and β-particles only 

 B α-particles and γ-rays only 

 C β-particles and γ-rays only 

 D α-particles, β-particles and γ-rays 


