 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 19 printed pages and 1 blank page. 

 IB16 11_0625_13/4RP © UCLES 2016 [Turn over 

# *7133156965* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## PHYSICS 0625/13 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) October/November 2016 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. Take the weight of 1.0 kg to be 10 N (acceleration of free fall = 10 m / s 2 ). 


© UCLES 2016 0625/13/O/N/16 

**1** Diagram 1 shows a measuring cylinder containing some water. 

 Diagram 2 shows the same measuring cylinder after a piece of rock has been slowly submerged in the water. 

## 50 

## 40 

## 30 

## 20 

## 10 

 diagram 1 

 cm^3 50 

## 40 

## 30 

## 20 

## 10 

 diagram 2 

 cm 3 

 piece of rock 

 What is the volume of the piece of rock? 

 A 15 cm^3 B 20 cm^3 C 23 cm^3 D 35 cm^3 

**2** The graph shows how the distance travelled by a vehicle changes with time. 

## 0 

## 0 

 distance 

 time 

## P 

## Q R 

## S 

 Which row describes the speed of the vehicle in each section of the graph? 

 P to Q Q to R R to S 

 A constant zero constant 

 B constant zero decreasing 

 C increasing constant decreasing 

 D increasing zero constant 


© UCLES 2016 0625/13/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**3** A stone falls freely from the top of a cliff. Air resistance may be ignored. 

 Which graph shows how the acceleration of the stone varies with time as it falls? 

## 0 

 0 time 

 acceleration 

## A 

## 0 

 0 time 

 acceleration 

## B 

## 0 

 0 time 

 acceleration 

## C 

## 0 

 0 time 

 acceleration 

## D 

**4** Which statement about mass or weight is **not** correct? 

 A Masses can be compared using a balance. 

 B Mass is a force. 

 C Weights can be compared using a balance. 

 D Weight is a force. 


© UCLES 2016 0625/13/O/N/16 

**5** The diagrams show an empty container, and the same container filled with liquid. 

 The empty container has a mass of 120 g. When filled with the liquid, the total mass of the container and the liquid is 600 g. 

 container filled with liquid 600 g 

 empty container 120 g 

 The volume of liquid in the container is 600 cm^3. 

 What is the density of the liquid? 

 A 0.020 g / cm^3 B 0.80 g / cm^3 C 1.0 g / cm^3 D 1.2 g / cm^3 

**6** The diagram shows all the horizontal forces acting on a truck. 

## 300 N 

## 500 N 500 N 

 truck 

 What is the size of the resultant horizontal force on the truck? 

 A 200 N B 300 N C 700 N D 1000 N 


© UCLES 2016 0625/13/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**7** Different loads are hung on a spring. The diagram shows the length of the spring with and without the loads attached. 

## 200 N 

## 400 N 

 20 cm 

 40 cm 

 65 cm 

 What is the extension of the spring when the load is 400 N? 

 A 5 cm B 25 cm C 40 cm D 45 cm 

**8** A uniform bar is pivoted at its centre. 

 4.0 m 3.0 m 

 pivot 

6.0 N (^) _F_ What force _F_ is needed to balance the bar? **A** 2.0 N **B** 4.5 N **C** 6.0 N **D** 8.0 N 


© UCLES 2016 0625/13/O/N/16 

**9** A ball is released from point X on a rough semicircular track. It comes to rest for an instant at point Y. The gravitational potential energy of the ball at point X is _E_ X. The gravitational potential energy of the ball at point Y is _E_ Y. 

## X 

## Y 

 Which equation relates the energy of the ball at point X to its energy at point Y? 

 A E X = E Y + work done against friction 

 B E X = E Y – work done against friction 

 C E X + E Y = work done against friction 

 D E X + E Y + work done against friction = 0 

**10** Two cars P and Q have different engines. 

 The input power from the fuel is the same for both engines. The engine in car P is more efficient than the engine in car Q. 

 Which statement about the cars or their engines must be true? 

 A Car P has a higher maximum speed than car Q. 

 B Car P has a lower maximum speed than car Q. 

 C The engine in car P uses less energy per hour than the engine in car Q. 

 D The engine in car P wastes less energy per hour than the engine in car Q. 

**11** A child runs up a set of stairs four times. The time taken for each run is recorded. 

 Which time is measured when the child’s useful power is greatest? 

 A 10 s B 20 s C 30 s D 40 s 


© UCLES 2016 0625/13/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**12** The diagrams show the actual sizes of the heels of four different shoes, as seen from underneath the shoe. 

 Which heel is most likely to cause damage to wooden floors? 

 A B C D 

**13** The diagram shows an instrument used to measure gas pressure. 

 liquid 

 What is the instrument called? 

 A ammeter 

 B barometer 

 C manometer 

 D thermometer 

**14** Which diagram best represents the movement of a smoke particle displaying Brownian motion? 

 A B 

## C D 

 smoke particle 

 smoke particle 

 smoke particle 

 smoke particle 


© UCLES 2016 0625/13/O/N/16 

**15** A cylinder containing trapped air is put into a freezer. 

 cylinder piston 

 at room temperature 

 cylinder piston 

 in a freezer 

 air air 

 As the air cools, the piston moves to the left as shown. 

 How has the air changed? 

 A Its density is less. 

 B Its mass is less. 

 C The average speed of its molecules is less. 

 D The average volume of its molecules is less. 

**16** A piece of melting ice at 0 °C and a beaker of boiling water are both in a laboratory. The laboratory is at 20 °C. 

 melting ice 

 boiling water 

 Bunsen burner heating water 

 What is happening to the temperature of the melting ice and what is happening to the temperature of the boiling water? 

 temperature of melting ice 

 temperature of boiling water 

 A constant constant 

 B constant increasing 

 C increasing constant 

 D increasing increasing 


© UCLES 2016 0625/13/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**17** A liquid-in-glass thermometer works because the liquid shows a change in 

 A colour. 

 B mass. 

 C thermal capacity. 

 D volume. 

**18** Which description applies to infra-red radiation? 

 A longitudinal and electromagnetic 

 B longitudinal but not electromagnetic 

 C transverse and electromagnetic 

 D transverse but not electromagnetic 


© UCLES 2016 0625/13/O/N/16 

**19** The diagram shows the temperature-time graph for hot water that is cooling in an uninsulated beaker. 

 80 

## 60 

## 40 

## 20 

## 0 

## 0 1 2 3 

 time / hours 

 temperature / °C 

 The beaker is now insulated. The same volume of hot water, at the same initial temperature as before, is put into the insulated beaker. The beaker is in the same room as before. 

 Which is the new temperature-time graph for the water as it cools? 

## 80 

## 60 

## 40 

## 20 

## 0 

## 0 1 2 3 

 time / hours 

 temperature / °C 

## C 

## 80 

## 60 

## 40 

## 20 

## 0 

## 0 1 2 3 

 time / hours 

 temperature / °C 

## D 

## 80 

## 60 

## 40 

## 20 

## 0 

## 0 1 2 3 

 time / hours 

 temperature / °C 

## A 

## 80 

## 60 

## 40 

## 20 

## 0 

## 0 1 2 3 

 time / hours 

 temperature / °C 

## B 


© UCLES 2016 0625/13/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**20** A small plastic ball floats on the surface of deep water. A stone is dropped into the water at point X. 

 A wave spreads out across the water surface, causing the ball to move. 

## X 

water surface (^) ball Which type of wave is produced by the stone, and in which direction does the ball move? type of wave (^) movement of balldirection of **A** longitudinal left and right **B** longitudinal up and down **C** transverse left and right **D** transverse up and down **21** Waves travel more slowly on the surface of shallow water than on the surface of deep water. Which diagram shows a wave travelling from deep water into shallower water? shallow water (slow) 

## C 

 shallow water (slow) 

## D 

 shallow water (slow) 

## A 

 shallow water (slow) 

## B 

 deep water (fast) 

 deep water (fast) 

 deep water (fast) 

 deep water (fast) 


© UCLES 2016 0625/13/O/N/16 

**22** Light strikes a plane mirror and is reflected. The angle between the ray of light and the mirror is 20 °. 

## 20 ° 

 ray of light 

 normal 

 mirror 

 What is the size of the angle of reflection? 

 A 20 ° B 70 ° C 140 ° D 160 ° 

**23** A student draws a ray diagram to show how a converging lens, of focal length _f_ , forms an image of an object. 

 He draws three rays to locate the image. 

 He then adds a fourth ray after the position of the image is known. 

 Which of the labelled rays must have been drawn after the position of the image was known? 

 object 

 image 

 f f 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 

**24** Which group shows four electromagnetic waves in order, from the largest wavelength to the smallest? 

 A microwaves, radio waves, X-rays, visible light 

 B radio waves, microwaves, visible light, X-rays 

 C visible light, X-rays, radio waves, microwaves 

 D X-rays, visible light, microwaves, radio waves 


© UCLES 2016 0625/13/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**25** A girl notices that, when she shouts into a cave, she hears an echo. 

 Which wave property causes the echo? 

 A diffraction 

 B dispersion 

 C reflection 

 D refraction 

**26** A man stands 110 m from a high wall. He makes a short, sharp sound and then hears an echo from the wall. 

 The speed of sound in air is 330 m / s. 

 How long after making the sound does the man hear the echo? 

 A 0.33 s B 0.67 s C 1.5 s D 3.0 s 

**27** In two separate experiments, a magnet is brought near to an unmagnetised iron bar. This causes the bar to become magnetised. 

 N magnet S X iron bar 

 S magnet N iron bar Y 

 experiment 1 

 experiment 2 

 Which magnetic pole is induced at X and at Y? 

 pole induced at X pole induced at Y 

 A N N 

 B N S 

 C S N 

 D S S 


© UCLES 2016 0625/13/O/N/16 

**28** A student holds a rod in his hand. 

 rod 

 hand 

 cloth 

 He rubs the rod with a cloth. The rod gains a positive charge. 

 Of which material could the rod be made, and which transfer of charge has happened? 

 material of rod transfer of charge 

 A metal negative charge from rod to cloth 

 B metal positive charge from cloth to rod 

 C plastic negative charge from rod to cloth 

 D plastic positive charge from cloth to rod 

**29** The diagram shows a lamp in a circuit. 

## P 

 Which change to the circuit would increase the current in the lamp? 

 A adding another resistor in parallel with the one in the circuit 

 B adding another resistor in series with the one in the circuit 

 C decreasing the electromotive force (e.m.f.) of the battery in the circuit 

 D moving the lamp to point P in the circuit 


© UCLES 2016 0625/13/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**30** An ammeter and an 18 Ω resistor are connected in series with a battery. The reading on the ammeter is 0.50 A. 

## 18 Ω 

## A 

 What is the electromotive force (e.m.f.) of the battery? 

 A 9.0 N B 9.0 V C 36 N D 36 V 

**31** In which circuit will the ammeter reading be greatest? 

## 2.0 Ω 2.0 Ω 

## 2.0 V 2.0 V 2.0 V 2.0 V 

## A 

## A 

## 2.0 Ω 

## A^ 2.0^ Ω 

## B 

## 2.0 Ω 2.0 Ω 

## A 

## C D 

## 2.0 Ω 

## 2.0 Ω 

## A 

**32** An electric washing machine is protected by an earth wire. 

 To which part of the washing machine should the earth wire be connected? 

 A the fuse 

 B the live wire 

 C the metal case 

 D the switch 


© UCLES 2016 0625/13/O/N/16 

**33** The diagram shows a potential divider. 

 6 V 

## 0 V 

 When brighter light falls on the light-dependent resistor (LDR), its resistance changes. 

 What happens to the resistance of the LDR and what happens to the current in it? 

 resistance of LDR current in LDR 

 A decreases decreases 

 B decreases increases 

 C increases decreases 

 D increases increases 

**34** Why is a fuse used in an electrical circuit? 

 A so that the current can have only one value 

 B to prevent the current becoming too large 

 C to provide a path to earth if a fault occurs 

 D to save electrical energy 


© UCLES 2016 0625/13/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**35** Which transformer can change a 240 V a.c. input into a 15 V a.c. output? 

 800 turns 40 turns 

## A 

 1000 turns 25 turns 

## B 

 1200 turns 75 turns 

## C 

 2400 turns 15 turns 

## D 

**36** An electric current can produce a heating effect and a magnetic effect. 

 Which row shows the effect that a relay uses and one application of a relay? 

 effect used by a relay one application of a relay 

 A heating effect allowing a small current to switch on a large current 

 B heating effect changing the voltage of an a.c. supply 

 C magnetic effect allowing a small current to switch on a large current 

 D magnetic effect changing the voltage of an a.c. supply 

**37** A nuclide of sodium can be represented by 2311 Na. 

 Which row gives the numbers of particles in a neutral sodium atom? 

 number of electrons 

 number of protons 

 number of neutrons 

 A 11 11 12 

 B 12 11 23 

 C 12 12 11 

 D 23 23 11 


© UCLES 2016 0625/13/O/N/16 

**38** Below are four statements about different isotopes of a certain element. 

 Which statement must be true? 

 A They have a different number of electrons. 

 B They have the same number of neutrons. 

 C They have the same number of nucleons. 

 D They have the same number of protons. 

**39** Radioactive source S emits α-particles, β-particles and γ-rays. A detector is placed 5 cm away from S. A thin sheet of paper is placed as shown in the diagram. 

## S 

 5 cm 

 thin sheet of paper 

 detector 

 Which emissions from the source can be detected? 

 A α-particles and β-particles only 

 B α-particles and γ-rays only 

 C β-particles and γ-rays only 

 D α-particles, β-particles and γ-rays 


© UCLES 2016 0625/13/O/N/16 

**40** A radioactive material emits α-particles. 

 The table shows the rate of emission of α-particles from the material at different times. 

 time / hours 

 rate of emission / particles per minute 

 0.0 160 

 4.0 40 

 8.0 

 What is the half-life of the material and what is the missing value at 8.0 hours? 

 half-life / hours 

 rate of emission at 8.0 hours / particles per minute 

## A 2.0 0 

## B 2.0 10 

## C 4.0 0 

## D 4.0 10 


## BLANK PAGE 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2016 0625/13/O/N/16 


