 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. 

 IB16 06_0610_12/3RP © UCLES 2016 [Turn over 

# *3322418281* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## BIOLOGY 0610/12 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) May/June 2016 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A, B, C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2016 0610/12/M/J/16 

1 Some yeast, sugar and water are mixed in a test-tube. The diagrams show the test-tube at the start and after one hour. 

 at start after one hour 

 yeast, sugar and water 

 bubbles of gas 

 Which process causes this change? 

 A growth 

 B reproduction 

 C respiration 

 D sensitivity 

2 A rat has the scientific name Rattus rattus. 

 What do the two parts of this name refer to? 

 A genus and species 

 B kingdom and genus 

 C kingdom and species 

 D variety and genus 


© UCLES 2016 0610/12/M/J/16 [Turn over 

3 The diagram shows a bird that lives near rivers. 

 Use the key to identify the bird shown in the diagram. 

 1 toes joined by a flap of skin ........................... go to 2 

 toes separate ................................................. A heron 

 2 beak as long or longer than the head ............ go to 3 

 beak not as long as the head ........................ B little grebe 

 3 top of head black ........................................... C avocet 

 top of head white ........................................... D mute swan 

4 In a plant, what is formed by a group of xylem vessels? 

 A a cell 

 B a tissue 

 C an organ 

 D an organ system 

5 The diagram shows a palisade mesophyll cell. 

 Which structure is not found in an animal cell? 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 


© UCLES 2016 0610/12/M/J/16 

6 Which statement is correct for phloem but not for xylem? 

 A It carries mineral ions. 

 B It carries starch. 

 C It carries sucrose. 

 D It is no longer living. 

7 Why does oxygen diffuse into the blood from an alveolus in the lungs? 

 A The oxygen concentration in the alveolus is greater than the carbon dioxide concentration in the blood. 

 B The oxygen concentration in the alveolus is greater than in the blood. 

 C The oxygen concentration in the blood is greater than in the alveolus. 

 D The oxygen concentration in the blood is greater than the carbon dioxide concentration in the alveolus. 

8 The diagram shows water and sugar molecules on either side of a partially permeable membrane. 

## X Y 

 key sugar molecule water molecule 

 partially permeable membrane 

 What happens during osmosis? 

 A More sugar molecules pass through the membrane from X to Y than from Y to X. 

 B More sugar molecules pass through the membrane from Y to X than from X to Y. 

 C More water molecules pass through the membrane from X to Y than from Y to X. 

 D More water molecules pass through the membrane from Y to X than from X to Y. 

9 Small molecules are used as the basic units in the synthesis of large food molecules. 

 Which statement is correct? 

 A Amino acids are basic units of carbohydrates. 

 B Fatty acids are basic units of glycogen. 

 C Glycerol is a basic unit of oils. 

 D Simple sugar is a basic unit of protein. 


© UCLES 2016 0610/12/M/J/16 [Turn over 

10 When a substance is added to meat, amino acids are produced. 

 What is this substance? 

 A a hormone 

 B an enzyme 

 C an oil 

 D water 

11 Which graph shows the effect of temperature on the activity of an enzyme? 

 temperature / °C 

 enzyme activity 

**A** (^) **B** 

## C D 

## 0 50 100 

 enzyme activity 

## 0 50 100 

 temperature / °C 

 enzyme activity 

## 0 50 100 

 temperature / °C 

 enzyme activity 

## 0 50 100 

 temperature / °C 

12 Which two substances are the products of photosynthesis? 

 A carbon dioxide and glucose 

 B carbon dioxide and water 

 C oxygen and carbon dioxide 

 D oxygen and glucose 


© UCLES 2016 0610/12/M/J/16 

13 In a photosynthesis experiment, a plant is left in bright sunlight for several hours. A leaf is then removed from the plant and tested for starch, using iodine solution. 

 The diagram shows the leaf from the plant that was used in the experiment. 

 white area 

 green area 

 Which diagram shows the result of the experiment? 

 A B C D 

 iodine solution turns blue / black 

 iodine solution stays brown 

 key 

14 Which type of food is not digested before being absorbed by the body? 

 A carbohydrate 

 B fat 

 C protein 

 D water 

15 The bacterium Salmonella enterica can cause severe food poisoning and the lining of the alimentary canal may be damaged. In these cases absorption of digested food products cannot easily take place. 

 Which region of the alimentary canal is most affected? 

 A colon 

 B ileum 

 C oesophagus 

 D stomach 


© UCLES 2016 0610/12/M/J/16 [Turn over 

16 The diagram shows some of the organs of the human body. 

## P 

## S 

## R 

## Q 

 In which organs does the digestion of proteins take place? 

 A P and Q B P and R C Q and R D Q and S 

17 The diagram shows a potted plant and the same plant 24 hours later. 

 24 hours 

 What causes the change in the appearance of the plant? 

 A Water loss is greater than water uptake. 

 B Water moves from the leaves to the stem. 

 C Water uptake is equal to water loss. 

 D Water uptake is greater than water loss. 


© UCLES 2016 0610/12/M/J/16 

18 Which graph shows most clearly what will happen to the rate of transpiration as humidity increases? 

 humidity 

## A 

 rate of transpiration 

 rate of transpiration 

 rate of transpiration 

 rate of transpiration 

 humidity 

## B 

 humidity 

## C 

 humidity 

## D 

19 The diagram shows the human heart and some of the blood vessels connected to it. 

## W Z 

 Before blood in W reaches Z it must 

 A gain glucose. 

 B give up heat to the skin. 

 C pass through capillaries. 

 D travel to the head. 


© UCLES 2016 0610/12/M/J/16 [Turn over 

20 Which substances are dissolved in human blood plasma? 

 A carbon dioxide, haemoglobin and glucose 

 B carbon dioxide, oxygen and haemoglobin 

 C glucose, hormones and urea 

 D oxygen, urea and starch 

21 What are the approximate percentages of oxygen and carbon dioxide in atmospheric air? 

 oxygen / % 

 carbon dioxide / % 

 A 16 4.00 

 B 16 8.00 

 C 20 0.04 

 D 20 4.00 

22 Which route is taken by air passing from the lungs of a human to the atmosphere? 

 A alveolus → bronchus → trachea 

 B alveolus → trachea → bronchus 

 C bronchus → alveolus → trachea 

 D trachea → alveolus → bronchus 

23 During aerobic respiration glucose is broken down. 

 What is released in this process? 

 carbon dioxide energy^ water 

 A    

 B    

 C    

 D    


© UCLES 2016 0610/12/M/J/16 

24 Which processes depend on the action of enzymes? 

 1 digestion 

 2 osmosis 

 3 respiration 

 A 1 and 2 B 1 and 3 C 1 only D 2 and 3 

25 Which diet will cause the liver to produce the most urea? 

 A high carbohydrate, low fat 

 B high fat, high fibre 

 C high fat, low protein 

 D high protein, low carbohydrate 

26 The diagram represents a simple reflex arc. 

 finger 

## R 

## Q 

 spinal cord P 

 muscle pin 

 What is the sequence of nerve cells through which an impulse passes during a reflex action? 

 first last 

 A P Q R 

 B Q R P 

 C Q P R 

 D R P Q 


© UCLES 2016 0610/12/M/J/16 [Turn over 

27 The diagram shows a section through an eye. 

 Which structure controls how much light enters the pupil? 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 

28 What are the effects of adrenaline? 

 breathing rate pulse rate 

 A decreased decreased 

 B increased increased 

 C increased no effect 

 D no effect increased 

29 Which organ breaks down heroin and alcohol? 

 A bladder 

 B brain 

 C kidney 

 D liver 

30 In which conditions will seeds germinate most quickly? 

 A dry and cold 

 B dry and warm 

 C wet and cold 

 D wet and warm 


© UCLES 2016 0610/12/M/J/16 

31 What are the characteristics of asexual reproduction? 

 fusion of gamete nuclei 

 genetic variety in the offspring 

 A   

 B   

 C   

 D   

32 The diagram represents processes in sexual reproduction. 

 cells in reproductive organs 

 gametes 

 zygote 

## Q 

## Q 

## R 

 cells of embryo 

 Which processes are represented by stages Q and R? 

## Q R 

 A meiosis meiosis 

 B meiosis mitosis 

 C mitosis meiosis 

 D mitosis mitosis 

33 Which name is given to the observable features of an organism? 

 A alleles 

 B genes 

 C genotype 

 D phenotype 

34 Which structure will be found in the nucleus of a body cell in a woman? 

 A X allele 

 B X chromosome 

 C Y allele 

 D Y chromosome 


© UCLES 2016 0610/12/M/J/16 [Turn over 

35 What is a mutation? 

 A a change in a gene or chromosome 

 B a condition caused by a dominant allele 

 C a process used in genetic engineering 

 D a type of continuous variation 

36 In the food chain below, the population of snakes is halved owing to a viral disease. 

 grass → locusts → snakes → eagles 

 What effect does this have on the other members of the food chain? 

 grass locusts eagles 

 A decrease increase decrease 

 B decrease increase increase 

 C increase decrease decrease 

 D increase increase decrease 

37 Which is an example of a population? 

 A all the animals and plants living in a pond 

 B all the mahogany trees growing in a forest 

 C all the people born in a country over a period of 100 years 

 D all the species of animals in Africa 


© UCLES 2016 0610/12/M/J/16 

38 The diagram represents the carbon cycle. 

 carbon dioxide in air 

 decomposing material in soil 

 green plants 

 animals fossil fuels 

## X 

 Which process is represented by arrow X? 

 A combustion 

 B feeding 

 C photosynthesis 

 D respiration 

39 A gene for insulin is taken from a human cell and placed in a bacterium. 

 The bacterium can then make human insulin. 

 What is this process called? 

 A artificial selection 

 B genetic engineering 

 C heterozygous inheritance 

 D natural selection 


© UCLES 2016 0610/12/M/J/16 

40 The diagram shows the positions of four farms and the concentrations of nitrate at different points in a river. 

 Which farm is likely to have been using too much fertiliser on its land? 

 farm A 

 farm B 

 farm D 

 farm C 

## 60 

## 40 

## 20 

## 0 

 nitrate concentration / ppm 

 direction of flow 

 direction of flow 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2016 0610/12/M/J/16 

## BLANK PAGE 


