 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. 

 IB16 06_0610_22/2RP © UCLES 2016 [Turn over 

# *1725547096* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## BIOLOGY 0610/22 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) May/June 2016 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2016 0610/22/M/J/16 

**1** Some yeast, sugar and water are mixed in a test-tube. The diagrams show the test-tube at the start and after one hour. 

 at start after one hour 

 yeast, sugar and water 

 bubbles of gas 

 Which process causes this change? 

 A growth 

 B reproduction 

 C respiration 

 D sensitivity 

**2** Which diagram shows a flower from a monocotyledon? 

 A B C D 

**3** In which part of the cell is oxygen used to release energy from nutrient molecules? 

 A mitochondrion 

 B ribosome 

 C rough endoplasmic reticulum 

 D vesicle 


© UCLES 2016 0610/22/M/J/16 **[Turn over** 

**4** The actual thickness of the leaf shown in the diagram is 2000 μm, but its thickness in the diagram is 50 mm. 

 What is the magnification of the diagram? 

 A ×0.025 B × 25 C × 100 D × 100 000 

**5** The diagram shows two cells. The net movement of water is from cell X to cell Y. 

 cell X cell Y 

 water 

 What causes water to pass from cell X to cell Y? 

 A water potential is higher in cell X and active transport occurs 

 B water potential is higher in cell X and osmosis occurs 

 C water potential is lower in cell X and active transport occurs 

 D water potential is lower in cell X and osmosis occurs 


© UCLES 2016 0610/22/M/J/16 

**6** For the stomata of a leaf to open, the guard cells accumulate more potassium ions than the surrounding cells. 

 Which row describes what happens? 

 movement of potassium ions 

 movement of water in relation to guard cells 

 final state of the guard cells 

 A active transport in turgid 

 B active transport out flaccid 

 C diffusion in plasmolysed 

 D diffusion out no change 

**7** The structures of antibodies, DNA molecules and enzymes are specific to their actions. 

 Which feature of each molecule makes it specific? 

 antibody DNA enzyme 

 A active site binding site base order 

 B base order active site binding site 

 C base order binding site active site 

 D binding site base order active site 

**8** Small molecules are used as the basic units in the synthesis of large food molecules. 

 Which statement is correct? 

 A Amino acids are basic units of carbohydrates. 

 B Fatty acids are basic units of glycogen. 

 C Glycerol is a basic unit of oils. 

 D Simple sugar is a basic unit of protein. 

**9** A food stain on a table cloth is where meat cooked in oil has been spilt. 

 It is washed in a biological washing powder. 

 Which combination of enzymes should be in the washing powder to remove the stain? 

 A amylase and lipase 

 B lipase and protease 

 C pectinase and amylase 

 D protease and pectinase 


© UCLES 2016 0610/22/M/J/16 **[Turn over** 

**10** Which graph shows the effect of temperature on the activity of an enzyme? 

 temperature / °C 

 enzyme activity 

**A** (^) **B** 

## C D 

## 0 50 100 

 enzyme activity 

## 0 50 100 

 temperature / °C 

 enzyme activity 

## 0 50 100 

 temperature / °C 

 enzyme activity 

## 0 50 100 

 temperature / °C 

**11** When a tissue from a man is grafted onto a woman it may be rejected by the woman’s body. 

 What is the main cause of this rejection? 

 A antibody production 

 B phagocytosis 

 C the action of antibiotics 

 D the presence of a Y chromosome 


© UCLES 2016 0610/22/M/J/16 

**12** The diagram shows a potted plant and the same plant 24 hours later. 

 24 hours 

 What causes the change in the appearance of the plant? 

 A Water loss is greater than water uptake. 

 B Water moves from the leaves to the stem. 

 C Water uptake is equal to water loss. 

 D Water uptake is greater than water loss. 

**13** Which graph shows most clearly what will happen to the rate of transpiration as humidity increases? 

 humidity 

## A 

 rate of transpiration 

 rate of transpiration 

 rate of transpiration 

 rate of transpiration 

 humidity 

## B 

 humidity 

## C 

 humidity 

## D 


© UCLES 2016 0610/22/M/J/16 **[Turn over** 

**14** Which process is an example of translocation? 

 A absorption of water by the roots and its movement through the xylem to the leaves 

 B loss of water from the leaves as it evaporates into the air 

 C movement of sucrose from the leaves through phloem to other parts of the plant 

 D the process by which plants use the food produced by photosynthesis to obtain energy 

**15** The diagram shows a section through the human heart. 

 Which is the right atrioventricular valve? 

## A 

## B C 

## D 

**16** What is the fluid in the blood called? 

 A lymph 

 B mucus 

 C plasma 

 D tissue fluid 


© UCLES 2016 0610/22/M/J/16 

**17** The antibodies that give immunity to a disease can be acquired in the following different ways. 

 1 feeding on breast milk 

 2 infection by disease 

 3 vaccination 

 Which give active immunity? 

 A 1 and 2 only 

 B 1 and 3 only 

 C 2 and 3 only 

 D 1, 2 and 3 

**18** Which actions increase the volume of the thorax during breathing? 

 external intercostal muscles 

 internal intercostal muscles 

 muscles of the diaphragm 

 A contract contract relax 

 B contract relax contract 

 C relax contract relax 

 D relax relax contract 

**19** What are the approximate percentages of oxygen and carbon dioxide in atmospheric air? 

 oxygen / % carbon dioxide/ % 

## A 16 4.00 

## B 16 8.00 

## C 20 0.04 

## D 20 4.00 

**20** Which processes depend on the action of enzymes? 

 1 digestion 

 2 osmosis 

 3 respiration 

 A 1 and 2 B 1 and 3 C 1 only D 2 and 3 


© UCLES 2016 0610/22/M/J/16 **[Turn over** 

**21** Lactic acid builds up in the muscles during vigorous exercise. 

 During recovery, how is this lactic acid removed? 

 A aerobic respiration of lactic acid in the liver 

 B anaerobic respiration of lactic acid in the muscles 

 C excretion of lactic acid by the kidneys 

 D removal of lactic acid by the alimentary canal 

**22** Which diet will cause the liver to produce the most urea? 

 A high carbohydrate, low fat 

 B high fat, high fibre 

 C high fat, low protein 

 D high protein, low carbohydrate 

**23** The diagram represents a simple reflex arc. 

 finger 

## R 

## Q 

 spinal cord P 

 pin muscle 

 What is the sequence of nerve cells through which an impulse passes during a reflex action? 

 first last 

 A P Q R 

 B Q R P 

 C Q P R 

 D R P Q 


© UCLES 2016 0610/22/M/J/16 

**24** What are the effects of adrenaline? 

 breathing rate pulse rate 

 A decreased decreased 

 B increased increased 

 C increased no effect 

 D no effect increased 

**25** The diagram shows the density of rods and cones across a horizontal section of the retina. 

 What is the position of the optic nerve? 

 density of receptors 

## A B C D 

 distance across the retina 

 rods 

 cones 

**26** Which statement about antibiotics is **not** correct? 

 A Antibiotics are used to treat diseases caused by viruses. 

 B Some antibiotics are produced by fungi. 

 C Some bacteria are resistant to antibiotics. 

 D When taking antibiotics for an infection, the treatment should be completed. 

**27** In which conditions will seeds germinate most quickly? 

 A dry and cold 

 B dry and warm 

 C wet and cold 

 D wet and warm 


© UCLES 2016 0610/22/M/J/16 **[Turn over** 

**28** What are the characteristics of asexual reproduction? 

 fusion of gamete nuclei 

 genetic variety in the offspring 

 A   

 B   

 C   

 D   

**29** Where are oestrogen and progesterone produced during the menstrual cycle? 

 oestrogen progesterone 

 A hypothalamus ovary 

 B ovary ovary 

 C ovary placenta 

 D placenta pituitary gland 

**30** Which structure will be found in the nucleus of a body cell in a woman? 

 A X allele 

 B X chromosome 

 C Y allele 

 D Y chromosome 

**31** When a cell divides, these events occur. 

 1 The DNA inside the cell is duplicated exactly. 

 2 Daughter cells are produced with the same chromosome number as the parent cell. 

 Which type of division has occurred? 

 A meiosis producing genetically different cells 

 B meiosis producing genetically identical cells 

 C mitosis producing genetically different cells 

 D mitosis producing genetically identical cells 


© UCLES 2016 0610/22/M/J/16 

**32** In the inheritance of ABO blood groups, when two parents have the genotypes IAIA^ and IAIo, what is the blood group of their offspring? 

 A group A 

 B group AB 

 C group B 

 D group O 

**33** The diagram shows a hydrophyte in a river. 

 surface of water 

 floating leaves 

 submerged direction of leaves water flow 

 Which statement about the submerged leaves is correct? 

 A They cannot photosynthesise. 

 B They have a thick cuticle. 

 C They offer little resistance to water flow. 

 D They require many xylem vessels for support. 

**34** Some disease-causing bacteria survive treatment with an antibiotic. 

 Which statement about the surviving bacteria is correct? 

 A The antibiotic will work better on the next generation of bacteria. 

 B The bacteria have undergone a process of natural selection. 

 C The bacteria will now be resistant to all antibiotics. 

 D The resistance of the bacteria is a result of selective breeding. 


© UCLES 2016 0610/22/M/J/16 **[Turn over** 

**35** The diagram shows a pyramid of biomass for a food chain in a woodland ecosystem. 

 fleas birds insects 

 trees 

 What is the pyramid of numbers for this food chain? 

 A B 

## C D 

**36** In the food chain below, the population of snakes is halved owing to a viral disease. 

 grass → locusts → snakes → eagles 

 What effect does this have on the other members of the food chain? 

 grass locusts eagles 

 A decrease increase decrease 

 B decrease increase increase 

 C increase decrease decrease 

 D increase increase decrease 


© UCLES 2016 0610/22/M/J/16 

**37** A gene for insulin is taken from a human cell and placed in a bacterium. 

 The bacterium can then make human insulin. 

 What is this process called? 

 A artificial selection 

 B genetic engineering 

 C heterozygous inheritance 

 D natural selection 

**38** When human DNA is inserted into the plasmid DNA of bacteria, which enzyme is used to cut the DNA? 

 A DNA ligase 

 B lipase 

 C protease 

 D restriction enzyme 


© UCLES 2016 0610/22/M/J/16 

**39** The diagram shows the positions of four farms and the concentrations of nitrate at different points in a river. 

 Which farm is likely to have been using too much fertiliser on its land? 

 farm A 

 farm B 

 farm D 

 farm C 

## 60 

## 40 

## 20 

## 0 

 nitrate concentration / ppm 

 direction of flow 

 direction of flow 

**40** A large amount of herbicide is applied to a field. However, some of the herbicide is washed into a nearby lake. 

 What is the effect of the herbicide on the weeds in the field and on the plants in the lake? 

 weeds in field plants in lake 

 A less growth less growth 

 B less growth more growth 

 C more growth less growth 

 D more growth more growth 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2016 0610/22/M/J/16 

## BLANK PAGE 


