 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 16 printed pages. 

 IB16 06_0610_21/3RP © UCLES 2016 [Turn over 

# *0137173808* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## BIOLOGY 0610/21 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) May/June 2016 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2016 0610/21/M/J/16 

**1** Some yeast, sugar and water are mixed in a test-tube. The diagrams show the test-tube at the start and after one hour. 

 at start after one hour 

 yeast, sugar and water 

 bubbles of gas 

 Which process causes this change? 

 A growth 

 B reproduction 

 C respiration 

 D sensitivity 

**2** Which name is given to a group of individuals that can reproduce to produce fertile offspring? 

 A a genus 

 B a kingdom 

 C a species 

 D an organ system 

**3** Use the key to identify the animal shown in the diagram. 

 has jointed legs 

 three pairs of legs 

 more than three pairs of legs 

 has tail 

## A 

 Hexagenia 

 no tail 

## B 

 Dytiscus 

 four pairs of legs 

## C 

 Argyroneta 

 more than four pairs of legs 

## D 

 Asellus 


© UCLES 2016 0610/21/M/J/16 **[Turn over** 

**4** Which organelles are present in large numbers in cells that produce insulin? 

 A nuclei and mitochondria 

 B ribosomes and mitochondria 

 C rough endoplasmic reticulum and cell walls 

 D vesicles and nuclei 

**5** The actual thickness of the leaf shown in the diagram is 2000 μm, but its thickness in the diagram is 50 mm. 

 What is the magnification of the diagram? 

 A ×0.025 B × 25 C × 100 D × 100 000 

**6** The diagram shows an experiment on osmosis. 

 Which arrow shows the direction of the net movement of water at the start of the experiment? 

 partially permeable membrane partially permeable membrane 

 glass tubing key water sugar solution 

## D 

## A 

## C 

## B 


© UCLES 2016 0610/21/M/J/16 

**7** Active transport is the movement of 

 A molecules from a region of their higher concentration to a region of their lower concentration. 

 B particles from a region of lower concentration to a region of higher concentration using energy from respiration. 

 C urine by relaxation of a sphincter muscle in the bladder. 

 D water through a partially permeable membrane from a more dilute to a more concentrated solution. 

**8** When bases pair up in the formation of DNA, what is one of the pairings? 

 A G with A B G with C C G with G D G with T 

**9** Small molecules are used as the basic units in the synthesis of large food molecules. 

 Which statement is correct? 

 A Amino acids are basic units of carbohydrates. 

 B Fatty acids are basic units of glycogen. 

 C Glycerol is a basic unit of oils. 

 D Simple sugar is a basic unit of protein. 


© UCLES 2016 0610/21/M/J/16 **[Turn over** 

**10** Which graph shows the effect of temperature on the activity of an enzyme? 

 temperature / °C 

 enzyme activity 

**A** (^) **B** 

## C D 

## 0 50 100 

 enzyme activity 

## 0 50 100 

 temperature / °C 

 enzyme activity 

## 0 50 100 

 temperature / °C 

 enzyme activity 

## 0 50 100 

 temperature / °C 

**11** The diagram represents enzyme action. 

## + 

## W 

## + 

## X Y 

 What are parts W, X and Y in this chemical reaction? 

 enzyme product substrate 

 A W X Y 

 B X W Y 

 C X Y W 

 D Y W X 


© UCLES 2016 0610/21/M/J/16 

**12** Two similar leaves are set up in test-tubes as shown. One is exposed to light, while the other is kept in the dark. 

 orange hydrogencarbonate indicator solution 

 green leaf 

 black paper 

 green leaf 

 After a few hours, which colour would the hydrogencarbonate indicator solution be in each tube? 

 light dark 

 A colourless blue-black 

 B purple yellow 

 C red blue 

 D yellow purple 


© UCLES 2016 0610/21/M/J/16 **[Turn over** 

**13** The diagram shows a villus. The arrows show the direction of flow within vessels associated with the villus. 

 Which vessel carries blood to the liver? 

## A 

## B 

## C D 

**14** What is **not** a result of cholera infection? 

 A intestinal blockage 

 B loss of salts from blood 

 C severe dehydration of body tissues 

 D severe diarrhoea 

**15** What is the function of bile? 

 A to acidify food entering the duodenum 

 B to emulsify starch 

 C to increase the surface area of fats for digestion 

 D to provide enzymes for fat digestion 


© UCLES 2016 0610/21/M/J/16 

**16** Which graph shows most clearly what will happen to the rate of transpiration as humidity increases? 

 humidity 

## A 

 rate of transpiration 

 rate of transpiration 

 rate of transpiration 

 rate of transpiration 

 humidity 

## B 

 humidity 

## C 

 humidity 

## D 

**17** The diagram shows a potted plant and the same plant 24 hours later. 

 24 hours 

 What causes the change in the appearance of the plant? 

 A Water loss is greater than water uptake. 

 B Water moves from the leaves to the stem. 

 C Water uptake is equal to water loss. 

 D Water uptake is greater than water loss. 


© UCLES 2016 0610/21/M/J/16 **[Turn over** 

**18** The diagram shows a section through the human heart. 

 Which is the right atrioventricular valve? 

## A 

## B C 

## D 

**19** What is the function of lymphocytes in the blood? 

 A antibody production 

 B blood clotting 

 C phagocytosis 

 D transport of hormones 

**20** Which part of a pathogen is recognised by the immune system? 

 A active site 

 B antibiotic 

 C antibody 

 D antigen 

**21** Compared with atmospheric air, air breathed out by a human contains 

 A less water vapour, less carbon dioxide. 

 B less water vapour, more carbon dioxide. 

 C more water vapour, less carbon dioxide. 

 D more water vapour, more carbon dioxide. 


© UCLES 2016 0610/21/M/J/16 

**22** What describes the actions of the intercostal muscles and the diaphragm when we breathe out? 

 external intercostal muscles 

 internal intercostal muscles diaphragm 

 A contract relax falls 

 B contract relax rises 

 C relax contract falls 

 D relax contract rises 

**23** What is the word equation for aerobic respiration in plants? 

 A carbon dioxide + water → glucose + oxygen 

 B glucose + carbon dioxide → water + oxygen 

 C glucose + oxygen → carbon dioxide + water 

 D glucose + water → carbon dioxide + oxygen 

**24** An amino acid is deaminated. This is the removal of 

 A the carbon-containing part. 

 B the nitrogen-containing part. 

 C the oxygen-containing part. 

 D the sulfur-containing part. 


© UCLES 2016 0610/21/M/J/16 **[Turn over** 

**25** The diagram represents a simple reflex arc. 

 finger 

## R 

## Q 

 spinal cord P 

 muscle pin 

 What is the sequence of nerve cells through which an impulse passes during a reflex action? 

 first last 

 A P Q R 

 B Q R P 

 C Q P R 

 D R P Q 

**26** The diagram shows the density of rods and cones across a horizontal section of the retina. 

 What is the position of the optic nerve? 

 density of receptors 

## A B C D 

 distance across the retina 

 rods 

 cones 


© UCLES 2016 0610/21/M/J/16 

**27** What are the effects of insulin and glucagon on the concentration of blood glucose? 

 effect of insulin on blood glucose concentration 

 effect of glucagon on blood glucose concentration 

 A decreases decreases 

 B decreases increases 

 C increases decreases 

 D increases increases 

**28** Which organ is most often damaged by regularly drinking too much alcohol? 

 A heart 

 B liver 

 C pancreas 

 D stomach 

**29** What are advantages of sexual and asexual reproduction? 

 advantage of sexual reproduction advantage of asexual reproduction 

 A less population growth only one parent required 

 B more energy efficient gametes can be transferred by environment 

 C more genetic variation faster 

 D no transfer of gametes needed does not compete with the parent for nutrients 

**30** The diagrams show pollen grains from three different species of plant as they appear under the microscope. The diagrams are all to the same scale. 

 1 2 3 

 Which pollen grains are involved in insect-pollination? 

 A 1 and 2 B 1 only C 2 and 3 D 3 only 


© UCLES 2016 0610/21/M/J/16 **[Turn over** 

**31** What happens to the chromosome number after meiosis and after mitosis? 

 meiosis mitosis 

 A halved halved 

 B halved stays the same 

 C stays the same halved 

 D stays the same stays the same 

**32** In the inheritance of ABO blood groups, when two parents have the genotypes IAIA^ and IAIo, what is the blood group of their offspring? 

 A group A 

 B group AB 

 C group B 

 D group O 

**33** Which structures are present in a bacterial cell? 

 cell wall nucleus 

 A   

 B   

 C   

 D   

**34** The whole of an island’s population of short-haired bumblebees is descended from just two parents. These were introduced from the mainland. 

 Which statement about the island’s short-haired bumblebee population, compared with that of the mainland, is correct? 

 A The population is less in danger of collapsing from disease. 

 B The population is more able to adapt to environmental changes. 

 C The population shows more genetic variety. 

 D The population will adapt to environmental changes more slowly. 


© UCLES 2016 0610/21/M/J/16 

**35** The diagram shows a pyramid of biomass for a food chain in a woodland ecosystem. 

 fleas birds insects 

 trees 

 What is the pyramid of numbers for this food chain? 

 A B 

## C D 

**36** The diagram shows part of the nitrogen cycle. 

 At which stage is denitrification occurring? 

 nitrogen in the atmosphere 

 nitrogen in plants 

 animals nitrates 

 nitrites ammonium compounds 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 


© UCLES 2016 0610/21/M/J/16 **[Turn over** 

**37** Penicillin is produced in a fermenter by growing the fungus _Penicillium_. The graph shows how the mass of living _Penicillium_ fungus and the concentration of penicillin changed over time. 

 mass 

 concentration 

 mass of living Penicillium fungus 

## 0 1 2 

 time / days 

## 3 4 5 

 concentration of penicillin 

 When is the best time to collect the penicillin? 

 A at 1.5 days 

 B at 3 days 

 C at 3.5 days 

 D at 5 days 

**38** A gene for insulin is taken from a human cell and placed in a bacterium. 

 The bacterium can then make human insulin. 

 What is this process called? 

 A artificial selection 

 B genetic engineering 

 C heterozygous inheritance 

 D natural selection 

**39** Which effect is **least** likely to occur as a result of deforestation? 

 A an increase in biodiversity 

 B an increase in soil erosion 

 C an increase in the level of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere 

 D an increased risk of flooding 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2016 0610/21/M/J/16 

**40** The diagram shows the positions of four farms and the concentrations of nitrate at different points in a river. 

 Which farm is likely to have been using too much fertiliser on its land? 

 farm A 

 farm B 

 farm D 

 farm C 

## 60 

## 40 

## 20 

## 0 

 nitrate concentration / ppm 

 direction of flow 

 direction of flow 


