 This document consists of 14 printed pages and 2 blank pages. 

 DC (KN/CGW) 144842/2 © UCLES 2018 [Turn over 

* 4 5 6 9 0 6 0 2 4 3 * 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/22 Paper 2 February/March 2018 2 hours Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all the questions. Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 


© UCLES 2018 0606/22/F/M/18 

 Mathematical Formulae 

### 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

 x 

 b b ac a 

 = 

 − 2 − 4 2 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( _n_ 

# 1 ) a 

_n_ –1 (^) _b_ + 

# ( 

 n 

# 2 ) a 

_n_ –2 (^) _b_ (^2) + … + 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) a 

_n_ – _r_ (^) _br_ (^) + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( _n_ 

# r )^ =^ 

 n! ( n – r )! r! 

### 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ 

 sin^2 A + cos^2 A = 1 

 sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A 

 cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC_ 

 a sin A =^ 

 b sin B =^ 

 c sin C 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

 ∆ = 

### 1 

 2 bc^ sin^ A 


© UCLES 2018 0606/22/F/M/18 **[Turn over** 

**1 (a)** 

### P Q 

### R 

###  

 Using set notation, write down the set represented by the shaded region. [1] 

 (b)  = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10} A = { x : x is a prime number} B = { x : x is an even number} C = {1, 2, 3, 4, 8} 

 (i) Complete the Venn diagram to show the elements of each set. [3] 

### A B 

### C 

###  

 (ii) Write down the value of n (( A , B , C ) )l^. [1] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/22/F/M/18 

**2** Determine the set of values of _k_ for which the equation ( 3 2 _k x_ )^2 + ( 2 _k_ 3 ) _x_ + 1 = 0 has no real roots. [5] 

**3** A group of five people consists of two women, Alice and Betty, and three men, Carl, David and Ed. 

 (i) Three of these five people are chosen at random to be a chairperson, a treasurer and a secretary. Find the number of ways in which this can be done if the chairperson and treasurer are both men. [2] 

 These five people sit in a row of five chairs. Find the number of different possible seating arrangements if 

 (ii) David must sit in the middle, [1] 

 (iii) Alice and Carl must sit together. [2] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/22/F/M/18 **[Turn over** 

**4 (a) (i)** State the amplitude of 15sin2 _x_ – 5. [1] 

 (ii) State the period of 15sin2 x – 5. [1] 

 (b) 

### 4 

### 3 

### 2 

### 1 

### 0 90 

### –1 

### –2 

### –3 

### –4 

 –180 –135 –90 –45 45 135 180 x 

 y 

 The diagram shows the graph of y = f( ) x for 180 c G x c G 180 c, where f ( x ) is a trigonometric function. 

 (i) Write down two possible expressions for the trigonometric function f( x ). [2] 

 (ii) State the number of solutions of the equation f ( ) x = 1 for 180 c G x c G 180 c. [1] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/22/F/M/18 

### 5 

 0.5 ms–1^104 m 

### A 

### B C 

 A river is 104 metres wide and the current flows at 0.5 ms–1^ parallel to its banks. A woman can swim at 1.6 ms–1^ in still water. She swims from point A and aims for point B which is directly opposite, but she is carried downstream to point C. Calculate the time it takes the woman to swim across the river and the distance downstream, BC , that she travels. [4] 

**6 (i)** Differentiate tan 

 x 1 3 

### + 

### J 

### L 

### KK 

### N 

### P 

 OO with respect to x. [2] 

 (ii) Hence find sec 

 x x 3 

(^2) d 

### J 

### L 

### KK 

### N 

### P 

## y OO.^ [2] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/22/F/M/18 **[Turn over** 

### 7 

### A 

 θ rad 

### B 

### D 

### O 

### C 

 8 cm 

### 1.4 

 rad 

 The diagram shows a circle with centre O and radius 8 cm. The points A , B , C and D lie on the circumference of the circle. Angle AOB = θ radians and angle COD = 1.4 radians. The area of sector AOB is 20 cm^2. 

 (i) Find angle θ. [2] 

 (ii) Find the length of the arc AB. [2] 

 (iii) Find the area of the shaded segment. [3] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/22/F/M/18 

**8 (a)** Solve the following equations. 

 (i) 5 e 3 x^ +^4 = 14 [2] 

 (ii) lg ( 2 y 7 ) + lg y = 2 lg 3 [4] 

**(b)** Write (^) ( log ) ( log ) log log _r p q_ 2 _r_^2 2 -^2 as a single logarithm to base 2. [2] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/22/F/M/18 **[Turn over** 

**9 Solutions to this question by accurate drawing will not be accepted.** 

 P is the point (8, 2) and Q is the point (11, 6). 

 (i) Find the equation of the line L which passes through P and is perpendicular to the line PQ. [3] 

 The point R lies on L such that the area of triangle PQR is 12.5 units^2. 

 (ii) Showing all your working, find the coordinates of each of the two possible positions of point R. [6] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/22/F/M/18 

**10 (a)** The function f is defined by f ( ) _x_ = 1 + _x_^2 , for all real values of _x_. The graph of _y_ = f( _x_ ) is given below. 

 y 

 x 

### 1 

 y 

### O 

 = 1 + x^2 

 (i) Explain, with reference to the graph, why f does not have an inverse. [1] 

 (ii) Find f^2 ( ) x. [2] 

 (b) The function g is defined, for x > k, by g ( ) x = 1 + x^2 and g has an inverse. 

 (i) Write down a possible value for k. [1] 

 (ii) Find g -^1 ( ) x. [2] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/22/F/M/18 **[Turn over** 

 (c) The function h is defined, for all real values of x , by h( x ) = 4e x^ + 2. Sketch the graph of y = h( x ). Hence, on the same axes, sketch the graph of y = h–1( x ). Give the coordinates of any points where your graphs meet the coordinate axes. [4] 

 O 

 y 

 x 


© UCLES 2018 0606/22/F/M/18 

**11 (a) (i)** Show that 

### ( ) ( ) 

 sin cos 

 sin sin A A 

### 1 A 1 + A 

 = cot A. [2] 

 (ii) Hence solve 

### ( ) ( ) 

 sin cos 

 sin sin x x 

 x x 3 3 

### 1 3 1 + 3 

 = 21 for 0 c G x G 180 c. [4] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/22/F/M/18 **[Turn over** 

 (b) Solve 10 tan 2 y sec y 1 = 0 for 0 G y G 2 r radians. [5] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/22/F/M/18 

**12** The volume, _V_ , and surface area, _S_ , of a sphere of radius _r_ are given by _V_ = 34 r _r_^3 and _S_ = 4 r _r_^2 respectively. 

 The volume of a sphere increases at a rate of 200 cm^3 per second. At the instant when the radius of the sphere is 10 cm, find 

 (i) the rate of increase of the radius of the sphere, [4] 

 (ii) the rate of increase of the surface area of the sphere. [3] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/22/F/M/18 

### BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2018 0606/22/F/M/18 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

### BLANK PAGE 


