* 5 3 2 5 1 3 2 9 2 1 * 

 This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. 

 DC (SC/CGW) 144843/3 

 © UCLES 2018 [Turn over 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/12 

 Paper 1 February/March 2018 

 2 hours 

 Candidates answer on the Question Paper. 

 Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. 

 Write in dark blue or black pen. 

 You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. 

 Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. 

 DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all the questions. 

 Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of 

 angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. 

 The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. 

 You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. 

 The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. 

 The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 

 Cambridge International Examinations 

 Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 


© UCLES 2018 0606/12/F/M/18 

 Mathematical Formulae 

## 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 For the equation ax 

 2 + bx + c = 0, 

 x 

 b b ac 

 a 

 = 

 − − 

 2 4 

 2 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

 ( a + b ) 

 n = a 

 n + 

# ( 

 n 

# 1 ) 

 a 

 n –1 b + 

# ( 

 n 

# 2 ) 

 a 

 n –2 b 

 2 + … + 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) 

 a 

 n – r b 

 r + … + b 

 n , 

 where n is a positive integer and 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) 

## = 

 n! 

 ( n – r )! r! 

## 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ 

 sin 

 2 A + cos 

 2 A = 1 

 sec 

 2 A = 1 + tan 

 2 A 

 cosec 

 2 A = 1 + cot 

 2 A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC_ 

 a 

 sin A 

## = 

 b 

 sin B 

## = 

 c 

 sin C 

 a 

 2 = b 

 2 + c 

 2 

- 2 _bc_ cos _A_ 

## ∆ = 

## 1 

## 2 

 bc sin A 


© UCLES 2018 0606/12/F/M/18 **[Turn over** 

**1** The remainder obtained when the polynomial p ( ) _x x ax_ 3 _x b_ 

 3 2 = + + is divided by x + 3 is 

 twice the remainder obtained when p ( ) x is divided by x 2. Given also that p ( ) x is divisible by 

 x + 1 , find the value of a and of b. [5] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/12/F/M/18 

**2** A curve has equation _y_ = 4 + 5 sin 3 _x_. 

 (i) Find x 

 y 

 d 

 d 

. [2] 

 (ii) Hence find the equation of the tangent to the curve y = 4 + 5 sin 3 x at the point where 

 r x 3 

## =. 

## [3] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/12/F/M/18 **[Turn over** 

**3 Do not use a calculator in this question.** 

 (a) Simplify 

## 3 2 5 

## 4 5 

## + 6 2 5 

## 

## ^ 

 ^ 

 h^ 

 h 

 h 

 , giving your answer in the form a + b 5 , where a and b are 

 integers. [3] 

 (b) In this part, all lengths are in centimetres. 

## B 

## A 

## C 

## AB = 6 2 3 

## BC = 6 + 2 3 

 The diagram shows the triangle ABC with AB = 6 2 3 and BC = 6 + 2 3. Given that 

 cos ABC 2 

## 1 

 =, find the length of AC in the form c d , where c and d are integers. [3] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/12/F/M/18 

**4** It is given that 

 ln 

 y x 

 x 

## 2 

## 4 1 

 2 

## = 

## + 

^ (^) h . **(i)** Find the values of _x_ for which _y_ is not defined. [2] **(ii)** Find _x y_ d d 

. [3] 

 (iii) Hence find the approximate increase in y when x increases from 2 to 2 + h , where h is small. [2] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/12/F/M/18 **[Turn over** 

**5** The first 3 terms in the expansion of 2 _ax_ 

 n ^ + h are equal to 1024 1280 x bx 

 2 

- + , where _n_ , _a_ and _b_ are 

 constants. 

 (i) Find the value of each of n , a and b. [5] 

 (ii) Hence find the term independent of x in the expansion of ax x 

 x 

## 2 

## 1 

 n 

 2 

## + 

## J 

## L 

## K 

## K 

 ^ 

## N 

## P 

## O 

## O 

h (^). [3] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/12/F/M/18 

## 6 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## O 

## M 

 The diagram shows the quadrilateral OABC such that OA = a , OB = b and OC = c. It is given that 

 AM : MC = 2 : 1 and OM : MB = 3 : 2. 

 (i) Find AC in terms of a and c. [1] 

 (ii) Find OM in terms of a and c. [2] 

 (iii) Find OM in terms of b. [1] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/12/F/M/18 **[Turn over** 

 (iv) Find 5 a + 10 c in terms of b. [2] 

 (v) Find AB in terms of a and c , giving your answer in its simplest form. [2] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/12/F/M/18 

**7 (a)** Find the values of _a_ for which det 

 a a 

 a 

 a 

## 4 

## 2 1 

## = 6 3 

## J 

## L 

## K 

## K 

## N 

## P 

## O 

## O 

## . [3] 

 (b) It is given that 

 3 4 

## 2 1 

## A = 

## J 

## L 

## K 

## K 

## N 

## P 

## O 

## O 

 and 

## 2 0 

## 3 5 

## B = 

## 

## J 

## L 

## K 

## K 

## N 

## P 

## O 

## O. 

 (i) Find A 

 –1 

. [2] 

 (ii) Hence find the matrix C such that AC = B. [3] 

 (c) Find the 2 # 2 matrix D such that 4 D + 3 I = O. [1] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/12/F/M/18 **[Turn over** 

**8** A particle _P_ , moving in a straight line, passes through a fixed point _O_ at time _t_ = 0 s. At time _t_ s after 

 leaving O , the displacement of the particle is x m and its velocity is v ms 

 –1 , where 

 v 12 e 48 t t , 0 

 2 t = H. 

 (i) Find x in terms of t. [4] 

 (ii) Find the value of t when the acceleration of P is zero. [3] 

 (iii) Find the velocity of P when the acceleration is zero. [2] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/12/F/M/18 

**9** The table shows values of the variables _x_ and _y_. 

 x 2 4 6 8 10 

 y 736 271 100 37 13 

 The relationship between x and y is thought to be of the form y A e 

 bx = , where A and b are constants. 

 (i) Transform this relationship into straight line form. [1] 

 (ii) Hence, by plotting a suitable graph, show that the relationship y A e 

 bx = is correct. [2] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/12/F/M/18 **[Turn over** 

 (iii) Use your graph to find the value of A and of b. [4] 

 (iv) Estimate the value of x when y = 500. [2] 

 (v) Estimate the value of y when x = 5. [2] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/12/F/M/18 

## 10 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 

## O 

 y 

 x 

 y x 2 1 3 x 

 2 = ^^ + h^ ^ h 

 The diagram shows the graph of y x 2 1 3 x 

 2 = ^^ + h^ ^ h. The curve has a minimum at the point A , a 

 maximum at the point B and intersects the y -axis and the x -axis at the points C and D respectively. 

 (i) Find the x -coordinate of A and of B. [5] 

 (ii) Write down the coordinates of C and of D. [2] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/12/F/M/18 

 (iii) Showing all your working, find the area of the shaded region. [5] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/12/F/M/18 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every 

reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the 

publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International 

Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after 

the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local 

Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

## BLANK PAGE 


