 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. IB17 06_0620_23/3RP© UCLES 2017 [Turn over 

# *0971587250* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/23 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) May/June 2017 Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet^ 45 minutes Soft clean eraserSoft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil.Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unlessthis has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

There areanswers **A** (^) , **forty B** , **C** questions on this paper. Answerand **D**. **all** questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the **one** you consider correct and record your choice in **soft pencil** on the separate Answer Sheet. **Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully.** Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer.Any rough working should be done in this booklet. A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16.Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2017 0620/23/M/J/17 

**1** Small crystals of purple KMnOcentres of separate petri dishes filled with agar jelly. They were left to stand under the same 4 ( _M_ r = 158) and orange K 2 Cr 2 O 7 ( _M_ r = 294) were placed at the physical conditions. After some time, the colour of each substance had spread out as shown. dish 1 

KMnO (^4) dish 2 K 2 Cr 2 O 7 The lengths of the arrows indicate the relative distances travelled by particles of each substance. Which statement is correct? **A** Diffusion is faster in dish 1 because the mass of the particles is greater. **B** Diffusion is faster in dish 2 because the mass of the particles is greater. **C** Diffusion is slower in dish 1 because the mass of the particles is smaller. **D** Diffusion is slower in dish 2 because the mass of the particles is greater. **2** A compound, X, has a melting point of 71 °C and a boiling point of 375 °C. Which statement about X is correct? **A** It is a liquid at 52 °C and a gas at 175 °C. **B** It is a liquid at 69 °C and a gas at 380 °C. **C** It is a liquid at 75 °C and a gas at 350 °C. **D** It is a liquid at 80 °C and a gas at 400 °C. 


© UCLES 2017 0620/23/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**3** A student used chromatography to analyse a green food colouring. The chromatogram obtained is shown. solvent front 

 baseline 

 blue spot 

 yellow spot 

 The table lists some yellow food dyes and their R f values. Which yellow food dye does the green food colouring contain? yellow food dye R f value A Quinolene Yellow 0.48 B Sunset Yellow 0.32 C tartrazine 0.69 D Yellow 2G 0.82 

**4** The electronic structures of atoms Q and R are shown. 

## Q R 

 Q and R form an ionic compound. What is the formula of the compound? A QR 7 B Q 2 R 4 C QR D Q 7 R 


© UCLES 2017 0620/23/M/J/17 

**5** Which substance is a macromolecule? **A** ammonia **B** carbon dioxide **C** diamond **D** water 

**6** The diagram shows metallic bonding. X 

 Y 

 Which labels are correct? X Y A atomic nucleus outer electron B metal atom mobile electron C metal ion mobile electron D positive ion negative ion 

# 7 Aqueous iron(III) sulfate and aqueous sodium hydroxide react to give a precipitate of 

# iron(III) hydroxide and a solution of sodium sulfate. 

 What is the balanced equation for this reaction? A Fe 2 (SO 4 ) 3 (aq) + 2NaOH(aq) → Fe(OH) 3 (s) + Na 2 SO 4 (aq) B Fe 2 (SO 4 ) 3 (aq) + 3NaOH(aq) → Fe(OH) 3 (s) + 3Na 2 SO 4 (aq) C Fe 2 (SO 4 ) 3 (aq) + 6NaOH(aq) → 2Fe(OH) 3 (s) + 3Na 2 SO 4 (aq) D 2Fe 2 (SO 4 ) 3 (aq) + 6NaOH(aq) → 4Fe(OH) 3 (s) + 6Na 2 SO 4 (aq) 

**8** The equation for the reaction between sodium carbonate and dilute hydrochloric acid is shown. Na 2 CO 3 + 2HC _l_ → 2NaC _l_ + H 2 O + CO 2 What is the maximum volume of carbon dioxide produced when 26.5with dilute hydrochloric acid? g of sodium carbonate react **A** 6 dm^3 **B** 12 dm^3 **C** 18 dm^3 **D** 24 dm^3 


© UCLES 2017 0620/23/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**9** Which statement about electrolysis is correct? **A** Electrons move through the electrolyte from the cathode to the anode. **B** Electrons move towards the cathode in the external circuit. **C** Negative ions move towards the anode in the external circuit. **D** Positive ions move through the electrolyte towards the anode during electrolysis. 

**10** The reactivity series for a number of different metals is shown. 

 most reactive least reactive magnesium zinc iron copper silver platinum The diagram shows different metal strips dipped into an electrolyte. V 

 metal strip metal strip 

 electrolyte Which pair of metals produces the highest voltage? A copper and magnesium B magnesium and platinum C magnesium and zinc D silver and platinum 

**11** Heat energy is produced when hydrocarbons burn in air. Which equations represent this statement? 1 C 2 H 5 OH + 3O 2 → 2CO 2 + 3H 2 O 2 C 2 H 4 + 3O 2 → 2CO 2 + 2H 2 O 3 CH 4 + 2O 2 → CO 2 + 2H 2 O **A** 1, 2 and 3 **B** 1 and 2 only **C** 1 and 3 only **D** 2 and 3 only 


© UCLES 2017 0620/23/M/J/17 

**12** Which statements about exothermic and endothermic reactions are correct? 1 During an exothermic reaction, heat is given out. 2 The temperature of an endothermic reaction goes up because heat is taken in. 3 Burning methane in the air is an exothermic reaction. **A** 1, 2 and 3 **B** 1 and 2 only **C** 1 and 3 only **D** 2 and 3 only 

**13** Hydrogen and chlorine react to form hydrogen chloride. The reaction is exothermic. 

H 2 (g) + C _l_ (^) 2 (g) → 2HC _l_ (g) The overall energy change for this reaction is –184 kJ / mol. The table gives some of the bond energies involved. bond bond energy inkJ / mol H–C _l_ +430 H–H +436 What is the energy of the C _l–_ C _l_ bond? **A** –240 kJ / mol **B** –190 kJ / mol **C** +190 kJ / mol **D** +240 kJ / mol **14** Which changes are physical changes? 1 melting ice to form water 2 burning hydrogen to form water 3 adding sodium to water 4 boiling water to form steam **A** 1 and 2 **B** 1 and 4 **C** 2 and 3 **D** 3 and 4 


© UCLES 2017 0620/23/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**15** A student was investigating the reaction between marble chips and dilute hydrochloric acid. 

 bung 

 marble 

chips (^25) cm^3 of dilute hydrochloric acid gas syringe Which changes slow down the rate of reaction? temperatureof acid concentrationof acid of marble chipssurface area **A** decrease decrease decrease **B** decrease decrease increase **C** increase decrease decrease **D** increase increase increase **16** Hydrogen is produced when methane reacts with steam. The equation for the reaction is shown. CH 4 (g) + H 2 O(g) CO(g) + 3H 2 (g) The forward reaction is endothermic. Which conditions produce the highest yield of hydrogen? pressure temperature **A** high high **B** high low **C** low high **D** low low 


© UCLES 2017 0620/23/M/J/17 

**17** An example of a redox reaction is shown. Zn + Cu 2+^ → Zn 2+^ + Cu Which statement about the reaction is correct? **A** Zn is the oxidising agent and it oxidises Cu 2+. **B** Zn is the oxidising agent and it reduces Cu 2+. **C** Zn is the reducing agent and it oxidises Cu 2+. **D** Zn is the reducing agent and it reduces Cu 2+. 

**18** Which oxide is amphoteric? 

**A** A _l_ (^) 2 O 3 **B** CaO **C** Na 2 O **D** SO 2 

# 19 Chloric(I) acid, HC l O, is formed when chlorine dissolves in water. It is a weak acid. 

 What is meant by the term weak acid? A It contains fewer hydrogen atoms than a strong acid. B It is easily neutralised by a strong alkali. C It is less concentrated than a strong acid. D It is only partially ionised in solution. 

**20** Silver nitrate reacts with sodium chloride to produce silver chloride and sodium nitrate. The equation for the reaction is shown. AgNO 3 (aq) + NaC _l_ (aq) → AgC _l_ (s) + NaNO 3 (aq) How is silver chloride separated from the reaction mixture? **A** crystallisation **B** distillation **C** evaporation **D** filtration 


© UCLES 2017 0620/23/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**21** Aqueous sodium hydroxide reacts with an aqueous solution of compound Y to give a greenprecipitate. 

 Aqueousprecipitate. ammonia also reacts with an aqueous solution of compound Y to give a green In each case the precipitate is insoluble when an excess of reagent is added. Which ion is present in Y? 

# A chromium(III) 

# B copper(II) 

# C iron(II) 

# D iron(III) 

**22** Which element is less reactive than the other members of its group in the Periodic Table? **A** astatine **B** caesium **C** fluorine **D** rubidium 

**23** Ununseptium (atomic number 117) is a man-made element that is below astatine in Group VII of the Periodic Table. What is the expected state of ununseptium at room temperature? **A** a diatomic gas **B** a liquid **C** a monatomic gas **D** a solid 

**24** Why are weather balloons sometimes filled with helium rather than hydrogen? **A** Helium is found in air. **B** Helium is less dense than hydrogen. **C** Helium is more dense than hydrogen. **D** Helium is unreactive. 


© UCLES 2017 0620/23/M/J/17 

**25** Which equation from the zinc extraction process shows the metal being produced by reduction? **A** ZnO + C → Zn + CO **B** 2ZnS + 3O 2 → 2ZnO + 2SO 2 **C** Zn(g) → Zn(l) **D** Zn(l) → Zn(s) 

**26** Element E: 

- forms an alloy 

- has a basic oxide 

- is below hydrogen in the reactivity series. What is E? **A** carbon **B** copper **C** sulfur **D** zinc 

**27** The section of the reactivity series shown includes a newly discovered element, symbol X. The only oxide of X has the formula XO. Ca Mg Fe X H Cu Which equation shows a reaction which occurs? **A** Cu(s) + X2+^ (aq) → Cu 2+(aq) + X(s) **B** 2X(s) + Cu 2+(aq) → 2X+(aq) + Cu(s) **C** X(s) + Fe 2 O 3 (s) → 2Fe(s) + 3XO(s) 

**D** X(s) + 2HC _l_ (aq) → XC _l_ (^) 2 (aq) + H 2 (g) 


© UCLES 2017 0620/23/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**28** Stainless steel is an alloy of iron and other metals. It is strong and does not rust but it costs muchmore than normal steel. 

 What is not made from stainless steel? A cutlery B pipes in a chemical factory C railway lines D saucepans 

**29** The diagram shows some uses of water in the home. 

## 1 2 3 

 For which uses is it important for the water to have been treated? A 1 only B 2 only C 3 only D 1, 2 and 3 

**30** Theatmosphere. carbon cycle describes how carbon dioxide gas is added to or removed from the 

 Which row describes the movement of carbon dioxide during each process? photosynthesis combustion respiration A added to the atmosphere added to the atmosphere removed from the atmosphere B added to theatmosphere the atmosphereremoved from added to theatmosphere C removed from the atmosphere added to the atmosphere added to the atmosphere 

**D** (^) the atmosphereremoved from added to theatmosphere the atmosphereremoved from 


© UCLES 2017 0620/23/M/J/17 

**31** Which row gives the catalyst for the Haber process and the sources of the raw materials? 

 catalyst source ofhydrogen source ofnitrogen A iron electrolysis fertiliser B iron methane air C vanadium pentoxide methane air D vanadium pentoxide methane fertiliser 

**32** Petrol burns in a car engine to produce waste gases which leave through the car exhaust. One of these waste gases is an oxide of nitrogen. Which statement describes how this oxide of nitrogen is formed? **A** Carbon dioxide reacts with nitrogen in the catalytic converter. **B** Nitrogen reacts with oxygen in the car engine. **C** Nitrogen reacts with oxygen in the catalytic converter. **D** Petrol combines with nitrogen in the car engine. 

**33** Which statement about sulfuric acid is correct? **A** It is made by the Haber process. **B** It is made in the atmosphere by the action of lightning. **C** It reacts with ammonia to produce a fertiliser. **D** It reacts with copper metal to produce hydrogen gas. 

**34** Two equations are shown. 

reaction 1 CaCO 3 → CaO + CO (^2) reaction 2 CaO + H 2 O → Ca(OH) (^2) Which terms describe reactions 1 and 2? reaction 1 reaction 2 **A** reduction hydration **B** reduction hydrolysis **C** thermal decomposition hydration **D** thermal decomposition hydrolysis 


© UCLES 2017 0620/23/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**35** Fuel oil, gasoline, kerosene and naphtha are four fractions obtained from the fractional distillationof petroleum. 

 What is the order of the boiling points of these fractions? highest boiling point → lowest boiling point A fuel oil → kerosene → gasoline → naphtha B fuel oil → kerosene → naphtha → gasoline C gasoline → naphtha → kerosene → fuel oil D naphtha → gasoline → kerosene → fuel oil 

**36** Butane and methylpropane are isomers with molecular formula C 4 H 10. Which statements are correct? 1 They have similar chemical properties. 2 They have the same general formula. 3 They have the same structural formula. **A** 1, 2 and 3 **B** 1 and 2 only **C** 1 and 3 only **D** 2 and 3 only 

**37** The diagram shows part of the molecule of a polymer. 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

 Which diagram shows the monomer from which this polymer could be manufactured? A B C D 

 H H H 

## H 

## C H C 

## H 

## H 

## C H 

## H 

## H 

## H C 

## H 

## H 

## C O 

## H 

## H 

## C C H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 


© UCLES 2017 0620/23/M/J/17 

**38** Ethanol can be produced by fermentation or by the catalytic addition of steam to ethene. Which row shows an advantage and a disadvantage for each process? 

fermentation (^) of steam to ethenecatalytic addition advantage disadvantage advantage disadvantage **A** batch process slow reaction continuous process fast reaction **B** (^) reactionfast continuousprocess pure ethanolformed raw materialrenewable **C** renewable raw material batch process pure ethanol formed slow reaction **D** (^) raw materialrenewable impure ethanolformed reactionfast finite rawmaterial **39** The structure of an ester is shown. H H C H 

## H 

## C C 

## O 

## H O 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C H 

## H 

 Which alcohol and carboxylic acid produce this ester? alcohol carboxylic acid A ethanol ethanoic acid B ethanol propanoic acid C propanol ethanoic acid D propanol propanoic acid 

**40** How can the amino acids in a protein be separated and identified? **A** Add a locating agent to the protein. **B** Hydrolyse the protein and then use chromatography. **C** Polymerise the protein and then add a locating agent. **D** Use chromatography on a solution of the protein. 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeInternational Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge LocalExaminations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2017 0620/23/M/J/17 

## BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2017 0620/23/M/J/17 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements^1 Hhydrogen^1 

(^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Beberyllium 9 **Key** atomic numberatomic symbol name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mgmagnesium 24 19 Kpotassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Srstrontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Gegermanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 (^22) Tititanium (^4840) Zrzirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rfrutherfordium– 23 Vvanadium (^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Crchromium (^5242) Momolybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sgseaborgium– (^25) Mnmanganese (^5543) Tctechnetium– (^75) Rerhenium (^186107) Bhbohrium– (^26) Feiron (^5644) Ruruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Iriridium (^192109) Mtmeitnerium– (^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pdpalladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Dsdarmstadtium– (^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rgroentgenium– (^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cdcadmium (^11280) Hgmercury (^201112) Cncopernicium– 114 F _l_ flerovium– (^116) Lvlivermorium– (^7) Nnitrogen 1415 Pphosphorus (^3133) Asarsenic (^7551) Sbantimony 12283 Bibismuth 209 (^8) Ooxygen 1616 Ssulfur (^3234) Seselenium (^7952) Tetellurium (^12884) Popolonium– (^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Brbromine 8053 I iodine 12785 Atastatine– (^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Scscandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) Lalanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). actinium– (^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium^141 (^91) Paprotactinium 231 (^60) Ndneodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pmpromethium– (^93) Npneptunium– (^62) Smsamarium (^15094) Puplutonium– (^63) Eueuropium (^15295) Amamericium– (^64) Gdgadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bkberkelium– (^66) Dydysprosium 16398 Cfcalifornium– (^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Eseinsteinium– (^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Mdmendelevium– (^70) Ybytterbium (^173102) Nonobelium– (^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lrlawrencium– 


