 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 14 printed pages and 2 blank pages. IB17 06_0620_12/4RP© UCLES 2017 [Turn over 

# *3788235166* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/12 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) May/June 2017 Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet^ 45 minutes Soft clean eraserSoft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil.Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unlessthis has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

There areanswers **A** (^) , **forty B** , **C** questions on this paper. Answerand **D**. **all** questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the **one** you consider correct and record your choice in **soft pencil** on the separate Answer Sheet. **Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully.** Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer.Any rough working should be done in this booklet. A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16.Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2017 0620/12/M/J/17 

**1** Four statements about the arrangement of particles are given. 1 Particles are packed in a regular arrangement. 2 Particles are randomly arranged. 3 Particles move over each other. 4 Particles vibrate about fixed points. Which statements describe the particles in a solid? **A** 1 and 3 **B** 1 and 4 **C** 2 and 3 **D** 2 and 4 

**2** A student needs to measure four different volumes of a solution accurately. The volumes are 10 cm (^3) , 25 cm (^3) , 50 cm (^3) and 60 cm (^3). The apparatus available includes a 25 cm^3 pipette. Which volumes could be measured using this pipette? **A** 10 cm^3 and 25 cm^3 **B** 25 cm^3 and 50 cm^3 **C** 25 cm^3 only **D** 50 cm^3 and 60 cm^3 **3** Impurities change the melting and boiling points of substances. Sodium chloride is added to a sample of pure water. How does the addition of sodium chloride affect the melting point and boiling point of the water? melting point boiling point **A** increases increases **B** increases decreases **C** decreases increases **D** decreases decreases 


© UCLES 2017 0620/12/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**4** The table shows the solubility of four substances, W, X, Y and Z, in ethanol and in water. 

 substance solubility inethanol solubility inwater W insoluble insoluble X insoluble soluble Y soluble insoluble Z soluble soluble Two methods of separation are given. ● method 1: add the substance to ethanol and then filter ● method 2: add the substance to water and then filter Which substances can be separated from each other by both method 1 and method 2? A W and X B X and Y C X and Z D Y and Z 

**5** Q and R are elements in the same period of the Periodic Table. Q has 7 electrons in its outer shell and R has 2 electrons in its outer shell. Which statement about Q and R is correct? **A** Q is a metal and R is a non-metal. **B** Q and R have different numbers of electron shells. **C** R is found to the right of Q in the Periodic Table. **D** The proton number of R is less than the proton number of Q. 

**6** Which electron arrangement for the outer shell electrons in a covalent compound is correct? 

 H C l 

## A 

 H C l 

## B C D 

## N H 

## H 

## H N H 

## H 

## H 

**7** Which element does **not** form a stable ion with the same electronic structure as argon? **A** aluminium **B** chlorine **C** phosphorus **D** potassium 


© UCLES 2017 0620/12/M/J/17 

**8** Graphite and diamond are both forms of the element carbon. Which row shows the number of other carbon atoms that each carbon atom is covalently bonded to in graphite and diamond? graphite diamond **A** 3 3 **B** 3 4 **C** 4 3 **D** 4 4 

**9** When chlorine reacts with hot concentrated aqueous sodium hydroxide one of the products 

# formed is sodium chlorate(V). 

# The formula of sodium chlorate(V) is NaC l O 3. 

# What is the relative formula mass of sodium chlorate(V), NaC l O 3? 

## A 52.0 B 74.5 C 106.5 D 223.5 

**10** Concentrated aqueous sodium chloride can be electrolysed. Which statement is correct? **A** Hydrogen gas is formed at the anode, and chlorine gas is formed at the cathode. **B** Hydrogen gas is formed at the cathode, and chlorine gas is formed at the anode. **C** Sodium metal is formed at the anode, and chlorine gas is formed at the cathode. **D** Sodium metal is formed at the cathode, and chlorine gas is formed at the anode. 

**11** Which statement about fuels is correct? **A** Heat energy can only be produced by burning fuels. **B** Hydrogen is used as a fuel although it is difficult to store. **C** Methane is a good fuel because it produces only water when burned. **D** Uranium is burned in air to produce energy. 


© UCLES 2017 0620/12/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**12** Which statements about exothermic and endothermic reactions are correct? 1 During an exothermic reaction, heat is given out. 2 The temperature of an endothermic reaction goes up because heat is taken in. 3 Burning methane in the air is an exothermic reaction. **A** 1, 2 and 3 **B** 1 and 2 only **C** 1 and 3 only **D** 2 and 3 only 

**13** A gas is produced when calcium carbonate is heated. Which type of change is this? **A** chemical **B** exothermic **C** physical **D** separation 

**14** X is a white solid which dissolves in water to give a blue solution. What is X? 

# A anhydrous cobalt(II) chloride 

# B anhydrous copper(II) sulfate 

# C hydrated cobalt(II) chloride 

# D hydrated copper(II) sulfate 


© UCLES 2017 0620/12/M/J/17 

**15** A student was investigating the reaction between marble chips and dilute hydrochloric acid. 

 bung 

 marble 

chips (^25) cm 3 of dilute hydrochloric acid gas syringe Which changes slow down the rate of reaction? temperatureof acid concentrationof acid of marble chipssurface area **A** decrease decrease decrease **B** decrease decrease increase **C** increase decrease decrease **D** increase increase increase **16** The reactions shown may occur in the air during a thunder-storm. N 2 + O 2 → 2NO 2NO + O 2 → 2NO 2 NO + O 3 → NO 2 + O 2 Which row shows what happens to the reactant molecules in each of these reactions? N 2 NO O 3 **A** oxidised oxidised oxidised **B** oxidised oxidised reduced **C** reduced reduced oxidised **D** reduced reduced reduced 


© UCLES 2017 0620/12/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**17** When compound P is added to sodium carbonate, carbon dioxide is produced. When compound Q is added to ammonium chloride, ammonia is produced. What are P and Q? P Q **A** a base a base **B** a base an acid **C** an acid a base **D** an acid an acid 

**18** Which oxide is suitable for treating acidic soil? **A** calcium oxide **B** carbon dioxide **C** phosphorus oxide 

# D silicon(IV) oxide 

**19** Which salt preparation uses a burette and a pipette? **A** calcium nitrate from calcium carbonate and nitric acid 

# B copper(II) sulfate from copper(II) hydroxide and sulfuric acid 

 C potassium chloride from potassium hydroxide and hydrochloric acid D zinc chloride from zinc and hydrochloric acid 

**20** Dilute sulfuric acid is added to two separate aqueous solutions, X and Y. The observations are shown. solution X white precipitate solution Y bubbles of a colourless gas Which row shows the ions present in the solutions? solution X solution Y **A** Ba 2+^ CO 3 2– **B** Ca 2+^ C _l_ – **C** Cu 2+^ CO 3 2– **D** Fe 2+^ NO 3 – 


© UCLES 2017 0620/12/M/J/17 

**21** Part of the Periodic Table is shown. Which element is a metal? **A B C D** 

**22** Which element is less reactive than the other members of its group in the Periodic Table? **A** astatine **B** caesium **C** fluorine **D** rubidium 

**23** An element has the following properties. ● It forms coloured compounds. ● It acts as a catalyst. ● It melts at 1539 °C. In which part of the Periodic Table is the element found? **A** Group I **B** Group VII **C** Group VIII **D** transition elements 

**24** Why are weather balloons sometimes filled with helium rather than hydrogen? **A** Helium is found in air. **B** Helium is less dense than hydrogen. **C** Helium is more dense than hydrogen. **D** Helium is unreactive. 


© UCLES 2017 0620/12/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**25** Element E: 

- forms an alloy 

- has a basic oxide 

- is below hydrogen in the reactivity series. What is E? **A** carbon **B** copper **C** sulfur **D** zinc 

**26** Calcium, copper, iron and magnesium are metals. They can be placed in order of reactivity. Which statement is correct? 

# A Copper reacts with dilute hydrochloric acid to form copper(II) chloride. 

 B Iron reacts with steam but magnesium does not. 

# C Iron(II) oxide cannot be reduced by heating strongly with carbon. 

 D Magnesium and calcium both react with hot water. 

**27** Steel is manufactured from the iron produced in a blast furnace. Which statement about the manufacture of iron and steel is **not** correct? **A** In a blast furnace, acidic impurities are removed by adding a basic oxide. **B** In a blast furnace, calcium oxide is added to remove basic impurities. **C** Oxygen is passed into the molten iron from a blast furnace to remove carbon impurities. **D** The molten iron from a blast furnace contains traces of other elements such as phosphorus. 

**28** Stainless steel is an alloy of iron and other metals. It is strong and does not rust but it costs much more than normal steel. What is **not** made from stainless steel? **A** cutlery **B** pipes in a chemical factory **C** railway lines **D** saucepans 


© UCLES 2017 0620/12/M/J/17 

**29** The diagram shows some uses of water in the home. 

## 1 2 3 

 For which uses is it important for the water to have been treated? A 1 only B 2 only C 3 only D 1, 2 and 3 

**30** Which gas in the air is needed for iron to rust? **A** argon **B** carbon dioxide **C** nitrogen **D** oxygen 

**31** A solid fertiliser contains ammonium sulfate. A sample of the fertiliser is shaken with water. To show the presence of ammonium ions in the solution, ......1...... is added and the gas produced is tested with damp ......2...... litmus paper. Which words complete gaps 1 and 2? 1 2 **A** aqueous sodium hydroxide blue **B** aqueous sodium hydroxide red **C** dilute hydrochloric acid blue **D** dilute hydrochloric acid red 


© UCLES 2017 0620/12/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**32** In which process is carbon dioxide **not** formed? **A** burning of natural gas **B** fermentation **C** heating lime **D** respiration 

**33** Statements about methods of manufacture and uses of calcium oxide are shown. 1 It is manufactured by reacting acids with calcium carbonate. 2 It is manufactured by heating calcium carbonate. 3 It is used to desulfurise flue gases. 4 It is used to treat alkaline soil. Which statements are correct? **A** 1 and 2 **B** 1 and 4 **C** 2 and 3 **D** 3 and 4 

**34** The structures of three substances are shown. 

 H C H 

## H 

## O H H C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## O H H C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## O H 

 Why do these substances all belong to the same homologous series? A They are all compounds. B They are all saturated. C They all contain oxygen. D They all contain the same functional group. 


© UCLES 2017 0620/12/M/J/17 

**35** The industrial fractional distillation of petroleum is shown. 

 kerosene fraction 

 naphtha fraction 

 gasoline fraction 

 refinery gas 

 diesel oil fuel oil fraction petroleum lubricating fraction and bitumen 

## Y 

 Which process happens at Y? A burning B condensation C cracking D evaporation 

**36** Two reactions are shown. 1 butane → ethene 2 ethene → ethanol Which terms describe reactions 1 and 2? 1 2 **A** cracking addition **B** cracking combustion **C** distillation addition **D** distillation combustion 


© UCLES 2017 0620/12/M/J/17 

**37** Ethene is a hydrocarbon. Which row shows the type of bond between the carbon atoms in ethene, and the effect of ethene on aqueous bromine? type of bond effect of ethene on aqueous bromine **A** single bond colour changes from brown to colourless **B** single bond colour changes from colourless to brown **C** double bond colour changes from brown to colourless **D** double bond colour changes from colourless to brown 

**38** Poly(ethene), nylon and _Terylene_ are all polymers. From which small units are all polymers made? **A** alkenes **B** monomers **C** plastics **D** proteins 

**39** Which property is a property of aqueous ethanoic acid? **A** It rapidly decolourises aqueous bromine. **B** It has a sweet smell. **C** It reacts with magnesium ribbon. **D** It turns red litmus blue. 

**40** The diagram shows part of the molecule of a polymer. 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

 Which diagram shows the monomer from which this polymer could be manufactured? A B C D 

 H H H 

## H 

## C H C 

## H 

## H 

## C H 

## H 

## H 

## H C 

## H 

## H 

## C O 

## H 

## H 

## C C H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 


© UCLES 2017 0620/12/M/J/17 

## BLANK PAGE 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeInternational Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge LocalExaminations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2017 0620/12/M/J/17 

## BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2017 0620/12/M/J/17 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements^1 Hhydrogen^1 

(^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Beberyllium 9 **Key** atomic numberatomic symbol name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mgmagnesium 24 19 Kpotassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Srstrontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Gegermanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 (^22) Tititanium (^4840) Zrzirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rfrutherfordium– 23 Vvanadium (^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Crchromium (^5242) Momolybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sgseaborgium– (^25) Mnmanganese (^5543) Tctechnetium– (^75) Rerhenium (^186107) Bhbohrium– (^26) Feiron (^5644) Ruruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Iriridium (^192109) Mtmeitnerium– (^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pdpalladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Dsdarmstadtium– (^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rgroentgenium– (^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cdcadmium (^11280) Hgmercury (^201112) Cncopernicium– 114 F _l_ flerovium– (^116) Lvlivermorium– (^7) Nnitrogen 1415 Pphosphorus (^3133) Asarsenic (^7551) Sbantimony 12283 Bibismuth 209 (^8) Ooxygen 1616 Ssulfur (^3234) Seselenium (^7952) Tetellurium (^12884) Popolonium– (^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Brbromine 8053 I iodine 12785 Atastatine– (^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Scscandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) Lalanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). actinium– (^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium^141 (^91) Paprotactinium 231 (^60) Ndneodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pmpromethium– (^93) Npneptunium– (^62) Smsamarium (^15094) Puplutonium– (^63) Eueuropium (^15295) Amamericium– (^64) Gdgadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bkberkelium– (^66) Dydysprosium 16398 Cfcalifornium– (^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Eseinsteinium– (^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Mdmendelevium– (^70) Ybytterbium (^173102) Nonobelium– (^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lrlawrencium– 


