 This document consists of 16 printed pages. DC (ST/SG) 126424© UCLES 2016 [Turn over 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

* 3 1 0 9 5 9 4 6 7 9 * **ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/12** Paper 1 **October/November 2016 2 hours** Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator **READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST** Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in.Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs.Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO **NOT** WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. AnswerGive non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of **all** the questions. angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question.The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together.The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 


© UCLES 2016 0606/12/O/N/16 

 Mathematical Formulae 

### 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ For the equation _ax_^2 + _bx_ + _c_ = 0, _x_ = -^ _b_^^! 2 _ba_^^2 -^4 _ac_. 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( _n_ 1 ) _an_ –1^ _b_ + (^) ( _n_ 2 ) _an_ –2^ _b_^2 + … + (^) ( _nr_ ) _an_ – _r_^ _br_^ + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( _nr_ ) = (^) ( _n_ – _n_! _r_ )! _r_!. 

### 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ sin 2 _A_ + cos^2 _A_ = 1 sec^2 _A_ = 1 + tan^2 _A_ cosec^2 _A_ = 1 + cot^2 _A_ 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC a_ sin _A_ =^ 

 b sin B =^ 

 c sin C a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A ∆ = 12 bc sin A 


© UCLES 2016 0606/12/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**1 (a)** Sets , _A_ and _B_ are such that n() = 26 , n ( _A_ + _B_ l) = 7 , n( _A_ + _B_ )= 3 and n ( _B_ ) = 15. Using a Venn diagram, or otherwise, find 

 (i) n ( A ), [1] 

 (ii) n ( A , B ), [1] 

 (iii) n ( A , B )l. [1] 

 (b) It is given that  = { x : 0 1 x 130 }, P = {multiples of 5}, Q = {multiples of 6} and R = {multiples of 2}. Use set notation to complete the following statements. (i) Q ........... R , [1] (ii) P + Q = ........... [1] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/12/O/N/16 

**2** Given that (^) _p p q_ 323^ ( _qrr_^ ) 5 _p q ra_^ _b_^ _c_ 1 21 23 

-^ = 

-     , find the value of each of the integers _a_ , _b_ and _c_. [3] 

**3** By using the substitution _y_ = log 3 _x_ , or otherwise, find the values of _x_ for which 3 ( log 3 _x_ )^2 + log 3 _x_^5 log 39 = 0. [6] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/12/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**4 (i)** Find the first 3 terms in the expansion of 2 _x_^231 _x_ 

 5 J L 

### KK N 

### P 

 OO , in descending powers of x. [3] 

**(ii)** Hence find the coefficient of _x_^7 in the expansion of (^3) _x_^1 3 2 _x_^231 _x_ 5 J + L 

### KK J 

### L 

### NKK 

### P 

### OO N 

### P 

### OO. [2] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/12/O/N/16 

**5 (i)** Find the equation of the normal to the curve _y_ = 21 ln( 3 _x_ + 2 ) at the point _P_ where _x_ =31. [4] 

 The normal to the curve at the point P intersects the y -axis at the point Q. The curve y = 21 ln( 3 x + 2 ) intersects the y -axis at the point R. (ii) Find the area of the triangle PQR. [3] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/12/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**6 (a)** Matrices **X** , **Y** and **Z** are such that 

 X 

### 2 

### 4 

### 6 

### 3 

### 1 

### 5 

### = 

### J 

### L 

### KK 

### K 

### N 

### P 

### OO 

 O ,^ Y^ =^ ^^1 -^1 0 h^ and^ Z^ 

### 0 

### 5 

### 1 

= (^3) 

### J 

### L 

### KK N 

### P 

### OO. 

 Write down all the matrix products which are possible using any two of these matrices. Do not evaluate these products. [2] 

 (b) Matrices A , B and C are such that A = 24 -^17 

### J 

### L 

### KK N 

### P 

### OO , B = J104 24 

### L 

### KK N 

### P 

 OO and AC = B. (i) Find A -^1. [2] 

 (ii) Hence find C. [3] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/12/O/N/16 

(^7) _y O x_ 

### A 

### B 

### C 

 y = 2 cos^ J x -^ r 6 L 

### KK N 

### P 

### OO 

 The diagram shows part of the graph of y = 2 cos^ J x -^ r 6 L 

### KK N 

### P 

 OO. The graph intersects the y -axis at the point A , has a maximum point at B and intersects the x -axis at the point C. (i) Find the coordinates of A. [1] 

 (ii) Find the coordinates of B. [2] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/12/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

 (iii) Find the coordinates of C. [2] 

 (iv) Find 2 cos J x -^ r 6 d x L 

### KK N 

### P 

## y OO. [1] 

 (v) Hence find the area of the shaded region. [2] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/12/O/N/16 

### 8 

 12 cm i rad 

### B 

### C 

### A 

### D 

### O 

 The diagram shows a sector AOB of the circle, centre O , radius 12 cm, together with points C and D such that ABCD is a rectangle. The angle AOB is i radians and the perimeter of the sector AOB is 47 cm. (i) Show that i = 1 92. radians correct to 2 decimal places. [2] 

 (ii) Find the length of CD. [2] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/12/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

 (iii) Given that the total area of the shape is 425 cm 2 , find the length of AD. [5] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/12/O/N/16 

**9 Do not use a calculator in this question.** The polynomial p( _x_ ) is _ax_^3 4 _x_^2 + _bx_ + 18. It is given that p( _x_ ) and pl^ ( ) _x_ are both divisible by 2 _x_ 3. **(i)** Show that _a_ = 4 and find the value of _b_. [4] 

 (ii) Using the values of a and b from part (i) , factorise p( x ) completely. [2] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/12/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

 (iii) Hence find the values of x for which p( x ) = x + 2. [3] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/12/O/N/16 

**10 (a)** 

 v ms –1 

### U 

(^0 20 30) 

### U 

### 2 

 t s The diagram shows part of the velocity-time graph for a particle, moving at v ms -^1 in a straight line, t s after passing through a fixed point. The particle travels at U ms -^1 for 20 s and then decelerates uniformly for 10 s to a velocity of U 2 ms -^1. In this 30 s interval, the particle travels 165 m. (i) Find the value of U. [3] 

 (ii) Find the acceleration of the particle between t = 20 and t = 30. [2] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/12/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

 (b) A particle P travels in a straight line such that, t s after passing through a fixed point O , its velocity, v ms -^1 , is given by v 

 t 82 3 = Je^ -^4 L 

### KK N 

### P 

### OO. 

 (i) Find the speed of P at O. [1] 

 (ii) Find the value of t for which P is instantaneously at rest. [2] 

 (iii) Find the acceleration of P when t = 1. [4] 

 Question 11 is printed on the next page. 


© UCLES 2016 0606/12/O/N/16 

**11** The variables _x_ and _y_ are such that when ln _y_ is plotted against _x_ , a straight line graph is obtained. This line passes through the points _x_ = 4 , ln _y_ = 0 20. and _x_ = 12 , ln _y_ = 0 08.. **(i)** Given that _y_ = _Ab x_ , find the value of _A_ and of _b_. [5] 

 (ii) Find the value of y when x = 6. [2] 

 (iii) Find the value of x when y = 1 1.. [2] 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonableeffort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge InternationalExaminations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge LocalExaminations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 


