 This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. 

 DC (RW/AR) 116667/2 

 © UCLES 2016 [Turn over 

 Cambridge International Examinations 

 Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

* 8 7 6 7 8 8 5 4 6 1 * 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/13 

 Paper 1 October/November 2016 

 2 hours 

 Candidates answer on the Question Paper. 

 Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. 

 Write in dark blue or black pen. 

 You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. 

 Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. 

 DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all the questions. 

 Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of 

 angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. 

 The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. 

 You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. 

 The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. 

 The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 


© UCLES 2016 0606/13/O/N/16 

 Mathematical Formulae 

### 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 For the equation ax 

 2 

 + bx + c = 0, 

 x 

 b b ac 

 a 

 = 

 − − 

 2 

 4 

 2 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

 ( a + b ) 

 n 

 = a 

 n 

 + 

# ( 

 n 

# 1 ) 

 a 

 n –1 

 b + 

# ( 

 n 

# 2 ) 

 a 

 n –2 

 b 

 2 

 + … + 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) 

 a 

 n – r 

 b 

 r 

 + … + b 

 n 

 , 

 where n is a positive integer and 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) 

### = 

 n! 

 ( n – r )! r! 

### 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ 

 sin 

 2 

 A + cos 

 2 

 A = 1 

 sec 

 2 

 A = 1 + tan 

 2 

 A 

 cosec 

 2 

 A = 1 + cot 

 2 

 A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC_ 

 a 

 sin A 

### = 

 b 

 sin B 

### = 

 c 

 sin C 

 a 

 2 

 = b 

 2 

 + c 

 2 

- 2 _bc_ cos _A_ 

### ∆ = 

 1 

 2 

 bc sin A 


© UCLES 2016 0606/13/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**1** On the axes below, sketch the graph of _y_ = 2 cos 3 _x_ for 0 G _x_ G 180 °. [3] 

 y 

### 3 

### 2 

### 1 

### 0 

### –1 

### –2 

### –3 

### 30° 60° 90° 120° 150° 180° 

 x 

**2** Express 

 m 

 m m 

 m 

 m 

### 2 

### 4 

### 3 

### 9 

### + 

### 

 in the form Am + B , where A and B are integers to be found. [3] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/13/O/N/16 

**3 (i)** Given that 3 _x p_ 1 2 _x_ 3 

 2 

 + ^ h =, show that, for x to be real, p 3 p 9 0 

 2 

### H. [3] 

 (ii) Hence find the set of values of p for which x is real, expressing your answer in exact form. [3] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/13/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**4 (i)** Find, in ascending powers of _x_ , the first 3 terms in the expansion of 

 x 

### 2 

### 4 

 6 

### 

### J 

### L 

### K 

### K 

### N 

### P 

### O 

### O 

### . [3] 

 (ii) Hence find the term independent of x in the expansion of 

 x 

 x 

### 4 

### 2 

### 3 

### 2 

 2 

 6 

### + + 

 x 4 

### J 

### L 

### K 

### K 

### J 

### L 

### K 

### K 

### N 

### P 

### O 

### O 

### N 

### P 

### O 

### O 

### . [3] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/13/O/N/16 

**5 (i)** Given that log _xy_ 

### 2 

### 5 

 9 

 = , show that log x log y 5 

 3 3 

### + =. [3] 

 (ii) Hence solve the equations 

 log xy 

### 2 

### 5 

 9 

### = , 

 log x log y 6 

 3 3 

### # =-. [5] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/13/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**6 (i)** Find ln 

 x 

 3 x 11 

 d 

 d 2 

### 

 ^ ^ hh 

. [2] 

 (ii) Hence show that ln 

 x 

 x 

 x p x c 

### 3 11 

 d 3 11 

 2 

 2 

### 

### = + 

 ^ h 

## y 

 , where p is a constant to be found, and c is a 

 constant of integration. [1] 

 (iii) Given that 

 a 

 ln 

 x 

 x 

 x 

### 3 11 

 d 2 

 2 

 2 

- 

### = 

## y 

 , where a 2 2 , find the value of a. [4] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/13/O/N/16 

### 7 

### 0 1 2 3 4 5 

### 1 

### 2 

### 3 

### 4 

### 5 

 ln y 

### 1 

 x 

### (1.5, 3.5) 

### (4.0, 1.5) 

 The variables x and y are such that when ln y is plotted against 

 x 

### 1 

 the straight line graph shown above is 

 obtained. 

 (i) Given that y A e 

 x 

 b 

 = , find the value of A and of b. [4] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/13/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

 (ii) Find the value of y when x = 0 32.. [2] 

 (iii) Find the value of x when y = 20. [2] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/13/O/N/16 

**8 (a) (i)** Show that 

 cosec sin 

 cosec 

 sec 

 2 

 i i 

 i 

 i 

### 

### =. [3] 

 (ii) Hence solve 

 cosec sin 

 cosec 

### 4 

 i i 

 i 

### 

 = for 0 ° 1 i 1360 °. [3] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/13/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

 (b) Solve 

 r 

 3 tan x 

### 4 

### + = 1 

### J 

### L 

### K 

### K 

### N 

### P 

### O 

### O 

 for 0 1 x 1 2 r, giving your answers in terms of r. [3] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/13/O/N/16 

**9 (a)** A team of 5 students is to be chosen from a class of 10 boys and 8 girls. Find the number of 

 different teams that may be chosen if 

 (i) there are no restrictions, [1] 

 (ii) the team must contain at least one boy and one girl. [4] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/13/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

 (b) A computer password, which must contain 6 characters, is to be chosen from the following 

 10 characters: 

 Symbols?! * 

 Numbers 3 5 7 

 Letters W X Y Z 

 Each character may be used once only in any password. Find the number of possible passwords 

 that may be chosen if 

 (i) there are no restrictions, [1] 

 (ii) each password must start with a letter and finish with a number, [2] 

 (iii) each password must contain at least one symbol. [3] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/13/O/N/16 

**10** A curve _y_ = f^ h _x_ is such that f _x_ 6 _x_ 8 e 

 2 x 

 l^ h = -. 

 (i) Given that the curve passes through the point P ^ 0 , 3 h, find the equation of the curve. [5] 

 The normal to the curve y = f^ h x at P meets the line y = 2 3 x at the point Q. 

 (ii) Find the area of the triangle OPQ , where O is the origin. [5] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/13/O/N/16 

**11** A particle moving in a straight line has a velocity of _v_ ms 

 –1 

 such that, t s after leaving a fixed point, 

 v 4 t 8 t 3 

 2 

### = +. 

 (i) Find the acceleration of the particle when t = 3. [2] 

 (ii) Find the values of t for which the particle is momentarily at rest. [2] 

 (iii) Find the total distance the particle has travelled when t = 1 5.. [5] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/13/O/N/16 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable 

effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will 

be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International 

Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after 

the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local 

Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

### BLANK PAGE 


