 This syllabus is regulated for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 7 printed pages. 

© UCLES 2019 **[Turn over** 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

**CHEMISTRY 0620/51** Paper 5 Practical test **May/June 2019** MARK SCHEME Maximum Mark: 40 

 Published 

This mark scheme is published as an aid to teachers and candidates, to indicate the requirements of the examination. It shows the basis on which Examiners were instructed to award marks. It does not indicate the details of the discussions that took place at an Examiners’ meeting before marking began, which would have considered the acceptability of alternative answers. 

Mark schemes should be read in conjunction with the question paper and the Principal Examiner Report for Teachers. 

Cambridge International will not enter into discussions about these mark schemes. 

Cambridge International is publishing the mark schemes for the May/June 2019 series for most Cambridge IGCSE™, Cambridge International A and AS Level and Cambridge Pre-U components, and some Cambridge O Level components. 


## 0620/51 

Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

May/June 2019 

 © UCLES 2019 

 Page 2 of 7 

 Generic Marking Principles 

 These general marking principles must be applied by all examiners when marking candidate answers. They should be applied alongside thespecific content of the mark scheme or generic level descriptors for a question. Each question paper and mark scheme will also comply with thesemarking principles.GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 1:Marks must be awarded in line with:^ •^ 

 the specific content of the mark scheme or the generic level descriptors for the question 

-^ 

 the specific skills defined in the mark scheme or in the generic level descriptors for the question 

-^ 

 the standard of response required by a candidate as exemplified by the standardisation scripts. GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 2:Marks awarded are always 

 whole marks 

 (not half marks, or other fractions). 

 GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 3:Marks must be awarded 

 positively 

## : 

## •^ 

 marks are awarded for correct/valid answers, as defined in the mark scheme. However, credit is given for valid answers which go beyond thescope of the syllabus and mark scheme, referring to your Team Leader as appropriate 

-^ 

 marks are awarded when candidates clearly demonstrate what they know and can do 

-^ 

 marks are not deducted for errors 

-^ 

 marks are not deducted for omissions 

-^ 

 answers should only be judged on the quality of spelling, punctuation and grammar when these features are specifically assessed by thequestion as indicated by the mark scheme. The meaning, however, should be unambiguous. GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 4:Rules must be applied consistently e.g. in situations where candidates have not followed instructions or in the application of generic leveldescriptors. 


Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

May/June 2019 

 Page 3 of 7 

 GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 5:Marks should be awarded using the full range of marks defined in the mark scheme for the question (however; the use of the full mark range maybe limited according to the quality of the candidate responses seen).GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 6:Marks awarded are based solely on the requirements as defined in the mark scheme. Marks should not be awarded with grade thresholds orgrade descriptors in mind. 


Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

May/June 2019 

 Page 4 of 7 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 1(a) 

 table of results volumes of aqueous sodium carbonate boxes completed correctly 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7 

## 1 

 heights of solid boxes completed 

## 1 

 in mm 

## 1 

 generally in ascending order 

## 1 

 1(b) 

 all points plotted correctly 

## 1 

 appropriate scale for 

 y -axis 

## 1 

 best fit line drawn 

## 1 

 1(c) 

 value from graph 

## 1 

 shown clearly 

## 1 

 unit = mm 

## 1 

 1(d) 

 height increases 

## 1 

 1(e) 

 improvement: use burette 

 or 

 pipette to measure the barium nitrate 

 /^ leave to settle longer / use measuring cylinders instead of test

 tubes 

## 1 

 explanation: instead of measuring cylinder 

 /^ solid more compact 

 /^ easier to read 

## 1 


Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

May/June 2019 

 Page 5 of 7 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 1(f) 

## M1 

 filter 

## 1 

## M2 

 dry 

## 1 

## M3 

 weigh solid 

## 1 

 1(g) 

 repeat and take average/compare 

## 1 

 1(h) 

 precipitation 

## 1 


Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

May/June 2019 

 Page 6 of 7 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 tests on solution F 

 2(a) 

## 0-3 

## 1 

 2(b) 

 bubbles 

 /^ fizz 

 /^ effervescence 

## 1 

 lighted splint pops 

## 1 

 2(c) 

 white precipitate 

## 1 

 2(d) 

 No reaction/change 

## 1 

 tests on solid G 

 2(e) 

 white (solid) 

## 1 

 2(f) 

 bubbles 

 /^ fizz 

 /^ effervescence 

## 1 

 limewater 

## 1 

 turns milky 

## 1 

 2(g) 

 white precipitate 

## 1 

 remains 

 /^ insoluble 

## 1 

 2(h) 

 no precipitate 

 /^ no observation 

 /^ reaction 

 /^ change 

## 1 

 2(i) 

 hydrochloric 

## 1 

 acid 

## 1 

 2(j) 

 calcium 

## 1 

 carbonate 

## 1 


Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

May/June 2019 

 Page 7 of 7 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

## 3 

 any six from: •^ 

 weigh nails 

 /^ use set number of nails 

## •^ 

 place nails in a suitable container 

-^ 

 add water to nails 

-^ 

 leave in water for a suitable time ( 

 ≥^ 1 week) 

## •^ 

 observe nails 

 /^ compare 

 /^ reweigh nails 

## •^ 

 repeat with nail with other coverings 

-^ 

 nail with least rust 

 /^ mass increase has best coating 

 Max 6 


