 This syllabus is regulated for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 16 printed pages. IB19 06_0620_21/3RP© UCLES 2019 [Turn over 

# *7311411163* 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/21 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) May/June 2019 Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet^ 45 minutes Soft clean eraserSoft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil.Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unlessthis has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

There areanswers **A** (^) , **forty B** , **C** questions on this paper. Answerand **D**. **all** questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the **one** you consider correct and record your choice in **soft pencil** on the separate Answer Sheet. **Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully.** Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer.Any rough working should be done in this booklet. A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16.Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/21/M/J/19 

**1** Whichhydrogen chloride gas, HC statement explains _l_? why ammonia gas, NH 3 , diffuses at a faster rate than 

 A Ammonia expands to occupy all of the space available. B Ammonia has a smaller relative molecular mass than hydrogen chloride. C Ammonia is an alkali and hydrogen chloride is an acid. D Ammonia molecules diffuse in all directions at the same time. 

**2** 2.00 g of powdered calcium carbonate is added to 50.0 cm^3 of hydrochloric acid. Which apparatus is used to measure the calcium carbonate and the hydrochloric acid? calcium carbonate hydrochloric acid **A** balance burette **B** balance thermometer **C** pipette burette **D** pipette thermometer 

**3** The measurements from a chromatography experiment using substance F are shown. The diagram is not drawn to scale. 

 100 mm 

 55 mm 

 90 mm 

 15 mm 

 solvent front 

 baseline 

 distance moved by F 

 What is the R f value of F? A 0.55 B 0.61 C 0.90 D 1.64 


© UCLES 2019 0620/21/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**4** Which statement about an atom of fluorine, 199 F, is correct? **A** It contains more protons than neutrons. **B** It contains a total of 28 protons, neutrons and electrons. **C** Its isotopes contain different numbers of protons. **D** Its nucleus contains 9 neutrons. 

**5** Which row describes the formation of single covalent bonds in methane? 

 A atoms share a pair of electrons both atoms gain a noble gas electronic structure B atoms share a pair of electrons both atoms have the same number of electrons in their outer shell C electrons are transferred from one atom to another 

 both atoms gain a noble gas electronic structure D electrons are transferred from one atom to another 

 both atoms have the same number of electrons in their outer shell 

**6** Which statement describes the structure of an ionic compound? **A** It is a giant lattice of oppositely charged ions. **B** It is a giant lattice of positive ions in a ‘sea’ of electrons. **C** It is a giant molecule of oppositely charged ions. **D** It is a simple molecule of oppositely charged ions. 

**7** Propane burns in oxygen. C 3 H 8 + _x_ O 2 → 3CO 2 + _y_ H 2 O Which values of _x_ and _y_ balance the equation? _x y_ **A** 5 4 **B** 7 4 **C** 10 8 **D** 13 8 


© UCLES 2019 0620/21/M/J/19 

**8** A tablet contains 0.080 g of ascorbic acid ( _M_ r = 176). What is the concentration of ascorbic acid when one tablet is dissolved in 200 cm^3 of water? **A** 9.1 × 10 –5^ mol / dm^3 **B** 4.5 × 10 –4^ mol / dm^3 **C** 9.1 × 10 –2^ mol / dm^3 **D** 2.3 × 10 –3^ mol / dm^3 

# 9 Which statement about the electrolysis of copper(II) sulfate solution using carbon electrodes is 

 correct? A A colourless gas is produced at the anode. B A colourless gas is produced at the cathode. C The colour of the electrolyte remains the same. D The mass of both electrodes remains constant. 

**10** Aluminium metal is extracted from aluminium oxide by electrolysis. Which ionic half-equation describes a reaction that occurs at the named electrode? ionic half-equation electrode **A** 2O2–^ → O 2 + 2e –^ anode **B** A _l_ 3+^ + 3e –^ → A _l_ anode **C** 2O2–^ → O 2 + 4e –^ cathode **D** A _l_ 3+^ + 3e –^ → A _l_ cathode 

**11** Which statement about the hydrogen fuel cell is **not** correct? **A** Chemical energy is converted into electrical energy. **B** Hydrogen is oxidised. **C** The reaction that takes place is endothermic. **D** Water is the only product. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/21/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**12** Nitrogen reacts with hydrogen to produce ammonia. N 2 + 3H 2 → 2NH 3 The reaction is exothermic. The bond energies are shown in the table. bond bond energyin kJ / mol N≡N 945 H–H 436 N–H 390 What is the energy change for this reaction? **A** –1473 kJ / mol **B** –87 kJ / mol **C** 87 kJ / mol **D** 1473 kJ / mol 

**13** Which change in reaction conditions increases both the collision rate and the proportion of molecules with sufficient energy to react? **A** addition of a catalyst **B** increasing the concentration of a reactant **C** increasing the surface area of a reactant **D** increasing the temperature of the reaction 

# 14 When blue-green crystals of nickel(II) sulfate are heated, water is produced and a yellow solid 

 remains. When water is added to the yellow solid, the blue-green colour returns. Which process describes these changes? A combustion B corrosion C neutralisation D reversible reaction 


© UCLES 2019 0620/21/M/J/19 

**15** The graph shows how the yield of product in a reversible reaction changes as the temperatureand pressure are changed. 

 All reactants and products are gases. reactants products 

 yield of product 

 pressure 

## 100 °C 

## 300 °C 

 Which row is correct for this reversible reaction? side of reaction with fewer moles 

 forward reaction A reactant exothermic B reactant endothermic C product endothermic D product exothermic 

**16** Which changes represent oxidation? 1 2 I–^ → I 2 + 2e – 

# 2 Cr(VI) → Cr(III) 

# 3 Fe(II) → Fe(III) 

 A 1 and 2 B 1 and 3 C 1 only D 2 only 

# 17 Nitrogen(I) oxide, N 2 O, nitrogen(II) oxide, NO, and carbon monoxide, CO, are all non-metal 

 oxides. They do not react with acids or bases. Which statement is correct? A They are acidic oxides. B They are amphoteric oxides. C They are basic oxides. D They are neutral oxides. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/21/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**18** The positions of elements W, X, Y and Z in the Periodic Table are shown. 

 W 

## X 

## Y 

## Z 

 Which elements form basic oxides? A W, X and Y B W and X only C Y only D Z only 

**19** Ethanoic acid is a weak acid. Hydrochloric acid is a strong acid. Which statements are correct? 1 Ethanoic acid molecules are partially dissociated into ions. 2 1.0 mol / dm^3 ethanoic acid has a higher pH than 1.0 mol / dm^3 hydrochloric acid. 3 Ethanoic acid is always more dilute than hydrochloric acid. 4 Ethanoic acid is a proton acceptor. **A** 1 and 2 **B** 1 and 3 **C** 2 and 4 **D** 3 and 4 

**20** The properties of an element are shown. 

 electrical conductivity density reaction with water high low reacts violently with cold water Which element has these properties? 

## A 

## C 

## D 

## B 


© UCLES 2019 0620/21/M/J/19 

**21** Which statement about elements in Group I and Group VII of the Periodic Table is correct? **A** Bromine reacts with potassium chloride to produce chlorine. **B** Iodine is a monatomic non-metal. **C** Lithium has a higher melting point than potassium. **D** Sodium is more reactive with water than potassium. 

**22** Which statement about elements in Group VIII of the Periodic Table is correct? **A** They all have a full outer shell of electrons. **B** They all react with Group I elements to form ionic compounds. **C** They are all diatomic molecules. **D** They are all liquids at room temperature. 

**23** The diagrams show the structure of two substances used to make electrical conductors. X Y 

 Which statement correctly describes X and Y? A X is a pure metal and Y is a compound. B X is a pure metal and Y is an alloy. C X is a solid and Y is a liquid. D X is harder and stronger than Y. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/21/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**24** Three metal compounds, P, Q and R, are heated using a Bunsen burner. The results are shown. P colourless gas produced, which relights a glowing splint Q colourless gas produced, which turns limewater milky R no reaction Which row shows the identity of P, Q and R? P Q R **A** magnesium carbonate potassium carbonate potassium nitrate **B** magnesium carbonate potassium nitrate potassium carbonate **C** potassium nitrate magnesium carbonate potassium carbonate **D** potassium nitrate potassium carbonate magnesium carbonate 

**25** Zinc is extracted from its ore, zinc blende, using two chemical reactions. 

 1 2ZnS + 3O 2 → 2ZnO + 2SO 2 2 2ZnO + C → 2Zn + CO 2 Which substance is reduced in reactions 1 and 2? reaction 1 reaction 2 A O 2 C B O 2 ZnO C ZnS C D ZnS ZnO 


© UCLES 2019 0620/21/M/J/19 

**26** Four metals, zinc, M, copper and magnesium, are reacted with aqueous solutions of theirnitrates. 

 The results are shown. metal magnesiumnitrate nitrateM coppernitrate nitratezinc magnesium    key zinc    = reacts M    = no reaction copper    What is the order of reactivity of these four metals starting with the most reactive? A copper → zinc → M → magnesium B copper → M → zinc → magnesium C magnesium → M → zinc → copper D magnesium → zinc → M → copper 

**27** Why is aluminium used to make containers for storing food? **A** It conducts electricity. **B** It has a high melting point. **C** It is resistant to corrosion. **D** It is strong. 

**28** Water can be treated by filtration then chlorination. Which uses do **not** need water of this quality? 1 water for cooling in industry 2 water for washing clothes 3 water for drinking **A** 1, 2 and 3 **B** 1 and 2 only **C** 1 and 3 only **D** 2 and 3 only 


© UCLES 2019 0620/21/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**29** Oxides of nitrogen are formed in car engines and are a source of air pollution. To decrease this pollution, catalytic converters are fitted to car exhausts. What happens to the oxides of nitrogen in the catalytic converter? **A** combustion **B** cracking **C** oxidation **D** reduction 

**30** The diagram shows an experiment to investigate how paint affects the rusting of iron. 

 air 

## P Q 

 water 

 iron painted iron 

 What happens to the water level in tubes P and Q? tube P tube Q A falls rises B no change rises C rises falls D rises no change 

**31** Ammonia is manufactured by the Haber Process. N 2 (g) + 3H 2 (g) 2NH 3 (g) The forward reaction is exothermic. Which conditions maximise the yield of ammonia? pressure temperature **A** high high **B** high low **C** low high **D** low low 


© UCLES 2019 0620/21/M/J/19 

**32** The carbon cycle is shown. 

 atmospheric carbon dioxide 

 dead organic matter 

 green plants 

 animals 

## Y 

 death and excretion 

## X 

## Z 

 decomposition 

 respiration 

 Which row describes processes X, Y and Z? X Y Z A respiration combustion photosynthesis B respiration photosynthesis combustion C photosynthesis combustion respiration D photosynthesis respiration combustion 

**33** Which row shows the conditions used in the Contact process? 

 temperature / °C 

 pressure/ atm catalyst A 25 2 iron B 25 200 iron 

# C 450 2 vanadium(V) oxide 

# D 450 200 vanadium(V) oxide 


© UCLES 2019 0620/21/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**34** The diagram represents a lime kiln used to heat limestone to a very high temperature. 

 air in 

 fuel in fuel in 

 air in X 

 waste gases 

 limestone 

 lime kiln 

 What leaves the kiln at X? A calcium carbonate B calcium hydroxide C calcium oxide D calcium sulfate 

**35** Which fuel could be gasoline? 

 Is it obtained from petroleum? 

 Is it used as fuel for cars? 

 Is it used as fuel for cars? 

 yes no 

 yes no A B C D 

 yes no 


© UCLES 2019 0620/21/M/J/19 

**36** Why is ethanol a member of the homologous series of alcohols but propane is **not**? **A** Ethanol has two carbon atoms per molecule but propane has three. **B** Ethanol can be made from ethene but propane is obtained from petroleum. **C** Ethanol is a liquid but propane is a gas. **D** Ethanol contains the same functional group as other alcohols but propane does not. 

**37** Chlorine reacts with methane. Which statements are correct? 1 The reaction takes place in the dark. 2 The reaction of chlorine with methane forms chloromethane. 3 Chloromethane reacts with chlorine to produce dichloromethane. 4 The reaction of chlorine with methane is an addition reaction. **A** 1 and 2 **B** 1 and 3 **C** 2 and 3 **D** 3 and 4 

**38** Which statements about aqueous ethanoic acid are correct? 1 Ethanoic acid contains the functional group –COOH. 2 Ethanoic acid reacts with carbonates to produce hydrogen. 3 Ethanoic acid turns Universal Indicator paper blue. 4 Ethanoic acid has a pH lower than pH 7. **A** 1 and 2 **B** 1 and 3 **C** 1 and 4 **D** 2 and 4 

**39** The structure of an ester is shown. 

 C 

OCH 2 CH 2 CH (^3) 

## O 

CH (^3) What is the name of the ester? **A** ethyl propanoate **B** methyl propanoate **C** propyl ethanoate **D** propyl methanoate 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeAssessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University ofCambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2019 0620/21/M/J/19 

**40** The structure of a polymer is shown. 

 O O O O Which type of polymer is shown and by which process is it formed? type of polymer formed by A carbohydrate addition polymerisation B carbohydrate condensation polymerisation C polyester addition polymerisation D polyester condensation polymerisation 


© UCLES 2019 0620/21/M/J/19 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements^1 Hhydrogen^1 

(^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Beberyllium 9 **Key** atomic numberatomic symbol name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mgmagnesium 24 19 Kpotassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Srstrontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Gegermanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 (^22) Tititanium (^4840) Zrzirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rfrutherfordium– 23 Vvanadium (^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Crchromium (^5242) Momolybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sgseaborgium– (^25) Mnmanganese (^5543) Tctechnetium– (^75) Rerhenium (^186107) Bhbohrium– (^26) Feiron (^5644) Ruruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Iriridium (^192109) Mtmeitnerium– (^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pdpalladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Dsdarmstadtium– (^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rgroentgenium– (^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cdcadmium (^11280) Hgmercury (^201112) Cncopernicium– 114 F _l_ flerovium– (^116) Lvlivermorium– (^7) Nnitrogen 1415 Pphosphorus (^3133) Asarsenic (^7551) Sbantimony 12283 Bibismuth 209 (^8) Ooxygen 1616 Ssulfur (^3234) Seselenium (^7952) Tetellurium (^12884) Popolonium– (^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Brbromine 8053 I iodine 12785 Atastatine– (^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Scscandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) Lalanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). actinium– (^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium^141 (^91) Paprotactinium 231 (^60) Ndneodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pmpromethium– (^93) Npneptunium– (^62) Smsamarium (^15094) Puplutonium– (^63) Eueuropium (^15295) Amamericium– (^64) Gdgadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bkberkelium– (^66) Dydysprosium 16398 Cfcalifornium– (^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Eseinsteinium– (^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Mdmendelevium– (^70) Ybytterbium (^173102) Nonobelium– (^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lrlawrencium– 


