 This syllabus is regulated for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 16 printed pages. 

 IB19 06_0620_12/3RP © UCLES 2019 [Turn over 

# *2696414869* 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/12 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) May/June 2019 

 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/12/M/J/19 

**1** Which row describes the arrangement and motion of particles in a solid? 

 arrangement motion 

 A random move in all directions 

 B random stay in one place 

 C regular move freely 

 D regular vibrate about a fixed point 

**2** A student measures 25.00 cm^3 of dilute hydrochloric acid accurately. 

 Which apparatus is most suitable? 

 A beaker 

 B measuring cylinder 

 C burette 

 D dropping pipette 

**3** Which sequence is used to separate a soluble salt from a mixture of a soluble and an insoluble salt? 

 A add solvent, heat the mixture, crystallise the mixture 

 B add solvent, heat the mixture, filter, crystallise the filtrate 

 C heat the mixture, filter, crystallise the filtrate 

 D heat the mixture, filter, add solvent, crystallise the filtrate 


© UCLES 2019 0620/12/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**4** Which diagram shows the correct level of the solvent at the start of a chromatography experiment? 

 B 

 spot of sample 

 level of solvent 

## A 

 spot of sample 

 level of solvent 

## D 

 spot of sample 

 level of solvent 

## C 

 spot of sample 

 level of solvent 

**5** What is an isotope of 1531 E? 

**A** (^) 1431 E **B**^3315 E **C** (^) 1631 E **D**^3316 E **6** Which statement about the formation of ions in chemical reactions is correct? **A** A bromine atom loses an electron and forms a –1 ion. **B** A chlorine atom gains an electron and forms a –1 ion. **C** A potassium atom gains an electron and forms a +1 ion. **D** A sodium atom loses an electron and forms a –1 ion. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/12/M/J/19 

**7** Which row describes the formation of single covalent bonds in methane? 

 A atoms share a pair of electrons both atoms gain a noble gas electronic structure 

 B atoms share a pair of electrons both atoms have the same number of electrons in their outer shell 

 C electrons are transferred from one atom to another 

 both atoms gain a noble gas electronic structure 

 D electrons are transferred from one atom to another 

 both atoms have the same number of electrons in their outer shell 

**8** Which statement explains why graphite is used as a lubricant? 

 A Each carbon atom in graphite forms three bonds. 

 B The bonding in graphite is covalent. 

 C The carbon atoms are arranged in hexagons. 

 D There are weak forces between the layers of carbon atoms. 

**9** The compound magnesium nitrate has the formula Mg(NO 3 ) 2. 

 What is the relative formula mass of magnesium nitrate? 

 A 86 B 134 C 148 D 172 

**10** Samples of dilute sulfuric acid and concentrated hydrochloric acid are separately electrolysed. 

 Which row describes the product at each electrode during the electrolysis of both substances? 

 product at each anode 

 product at each cathode 

 A different different 

 B different same 

 C same different 

 D same same 


© UCLES 2019 0620/12/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**11** Which row describes the energy level diagram and energy change in an exothermic reaction? 

 energy level diagram energy is 

 A reactants higher than products absorbed 

 B reactants higher than products released 

 C reactants lower than products absorbed 

 D reactants lower than products released 

**12** Which process is a physical change? 

 A a firework exploding 

 B burning wood 

 C chocolate melting 

 D iron rusting 

**13** An experiment is set up as shown. 

 The mass of the conical flask and its contents is measured at 30 second intervals. 

 50 cm^3 dilute hydrochloric acid 

 balance 

 1 g calcium carbonate 

 Which statement about the reaction and about changes to the reaction conditions is correct? 

 A Adding 10 cm^3 of water to the 50 cm^3 of acid increases the rate of the reaction. 

 B Increasing the size of the pieces of calcium carbonate increases the rate of the reaction. 

 C Increasing the temperature increases the rate of the reaction. 

 D The mass of the conical flask increases as carbon dioxide is formed. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/12/M/J/19 

# 14 When blue-green crystals of nickel(II) sulfate are heated, water is produced and a yellow solid 

 remains. When water is added to the yellow solid, the blue-green colour returns. 

 Which process describes these changes? 

 A combustion 

 B corrosion 

 C neutralisation 

 D reversible reaction 

**15** Different types of reaction are listed. 

 1 oxidation 

 2 decomposition 

 3 combustion 

 4 reduction 

 The equation shows the reaction of magnesium with oxygen. 

 2Mg + O 2 → 2MgO 

 Which types of reaction does magnesium undergo in this reaction? 

 A 1 and 3 B 1 only C 2 and 4 D 4 only 

**16** Which colours are seen when litmus and methyl orange are added to separate samples of aqueous sodium hydroxide? 

 litmus methyl orange 

 A blue orange 

 B blue yellow 

 C purple orange 

 D purple yellow 


© UCLES 2019 0620/12/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**17** The positions of elements W, X, Y and Z in the Periodic Table are shown. 

## W 

## X 

## Y 

## Z 

 Which elements form basic oxides? 

 A W, X and Y B W and X only C Y only D Z only 

**18** An acid is neutralised by adding an excess of an insoluble solid base. 

 A soluble salt is formed. 

 How is the pure salt obtained from the reaction mixture? 

 A crystallisation → evaporation → filtration 

 B evaporation → crystallisation → filtration 

 C filtration → crystallisation → evaporation 

 D filtration → evaporation → crystallisation 

**19** A substance is tested with three different reagents. 

# Which row shows the results obtained with aqueous iron(II) nitrate? 

 aqueous sodium hydroxide 

 acidified aqueous silver nitrate 

 acidified aqueous barium nitrate 

 A green precipitate, insoluble in excess 

 no reaction no reaction 

 B green precipitate, insoluble in excess 

 white precipitate white precipitate 

 C white precipitate, insoluble in excess 

 cream precipitate no reaction 

 D white precipitate that dissolves in excess 

 no reaction white precipitate 


© UCLES 2019 0620/12/M/J/19 

**20** Part of the Periodic Table is shown. 

## Y Z 

## X 

 Which row describes the properties of X, Y and Z? 

 good conductor of electricity 

 high melting point 

 A X Z 

 B Y Z and X 

 C Y and Z Z 

 D Z and X X 

**21** The melting points and boiling points of the elements of Group I of the Periodic Table are shown. 

 element 

 melting point / °C 

 boiling point / °C 

 lithium 181 1330 

 sodium 98 883 

 potassium 63 759 

 rubidium 39 688 

 caesium 28 671 

 Which pair of elements are liquid at 800 °C? 

 A caesium and rubidium 

 B potassium and sodium 

 C lithium and sodium 

 D potassium and caesium 


© UCLES 2019 0620/12/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**22** The table gives some information about four metals, Q, R, S and T. 

 melting point in °C 

 density in g / dm^3 

 colour of metal sulfate 

 catalytic activity 

 Q 650 1.74 white no 

 R 1455 green 

 S 842 1.55 white no 

 T 1085 8.96 yes 

 Which statements are correct? 

 1 T forms a coloured sulfate. 

 2 Q and S are transition elements. 

 3 The density of R is 0.53 g / cm^3. 

 4 R shows catalytic activity. 

 A 1 and 3 B 1 and 4 C 2 and 3 D 2 and 4 

**23** The electronic structures of helium, neon and argon are shown. 

 He Ne Ar 

 Which row describes these gases? 

 reactivity form of the gas electronic structure 

 A reactive monoatomic incomplete outer shell of electrons 

 B unreactive diatomic complete outer shell of electrons 

 C unreactive diatomic incomplete outer shell of electrons 

 D unreactive monoatomic complete outer shell of electrons 


© UCLES 2019 0620/12/M/J/19 

**24** The diagrams show the structure of two substances used to make electrical conductors. 

 X Y 

 Which statement correctly describes X and Y? 

 A X is a pure metal and Y is a compound. 

 B X is a pure metal and Y is an alloy. 

 C X is a solid and Y is a liquid. 

 D X is harder and stronger than Y. 

**25** Three different metals are reacted separately with dilute hydrochloric acid and with water. The results are shown. 

metal (^) dilute hydrochloric acidreaction with reaction with water R reacts no reaction S no reaction no reaction T reacts reacts What is the order of reactivity of the metals starting with the most reactive? **A** R → S → T **B** S → R → T **C** T → R → S **D** T → S → R **26** Iron is extracted from its ore in a blast furnace. Hematite, coke, limestone and hot air are added to the furnace. Which explanation is **not** correct? **A** Coke burns and produces a high temperature. 

# B Hematite is the ore containing the iron as iron(III) oxide. 

 C Hot air provides the oxygen for the burning. 

# D Limestone reduces the iron(III) oxide to iron. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/12/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**27** Which property of aluminium makes it useful in the manufacture of aircraft? 

 A conducts electricity 

 B high boiling point 

 C low density 

 D silver colour 

**28** Water can be treated by filtration then chlorination. 

 Which uses do not need water of this quality? 

 1 water for cooling in industry 

 2 water for washing clothes 

 3 water for drinking 

 A 1, 2 and 3 B 1 and 2 only C 1 and 3 only D 2 and 3 only 

**29** The following gases pollute the atmosphere. 

 1 sulfur dioxide 

 2 oxides of nitrogen 

 3 carbon monoxide 

 Which gases contribute to acid rain? 

 A 1 only B 1 and 2 C 1 and 3 D 2 and 3 


© UCLES 2019 0620/12/M/J/19 

**30** The diagram shows an experiment to investigate how paint affects the rusting of iron. 

 air 

## P Q 

 water 

 iron painted iron 

 What happens to the water level in tubes P and Q? 

 tube P tube Q 

 A falls rises 

 B no change rises 

 C rises falls 

 D rises no change 

**31** Ammonia gas is produced when compound X is warmed with an ammonium salt. 

 What is X? 

 A calcium carbonate 

 B calcium hydroxide 

 C sodium chloride 

 D potassium nitrate 

**32** Which statement describes a disadvantage of sulfur dioxide? 

 A It can be used as a bleach when making wood pulp. 

 B It can be used to kill bacteria in food. 

 C It can be used to manufacture sulfuric acid. 

 D It dissolves in water to form acid rain. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/12/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**33** The diagram represents a lime kiln used to heat limestone to a very high temperature. 

 air in 

 fuel in fuel in 

 air in 

## X 

 waste gases 

 limestone 

 lime kiln 

 What leaves the kiln at X? 

 A calcium carbonate 

 B calcium hydroxide 

 C calcium oxide 

 D calcium sulfate 

**34** What is the structure of ethanoic acid? 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## O 

## OH 

## C 

## B C 

## C OH 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## H C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## H H 

## D 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## H C 

## A 


© UCLES 2019 0620/12/M/J/19 

**35** Which fuel could be gasoline? 

 Is it obtained from petroleum? 

 Is it used as fuel for cars? 

 Is it used as fuel for cars? 

 yes no 

 yes no 

## A B C D 

 yes no 

**36** A hydrocarbon W burns to form carbon dioxide and water. 

 W decolourises bromine water. 

 What is the name of W and what is its structure? 

 name of W structure of W 

 A ethane C 

## H 

## H H 

## H 

## C 

## H H 

 B ethane C^ C 

 H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

 C ethene C 

## H 

## H H 

## H 

## C 

## H H 

 D ethene C^ C 

 H 

## H 

## H 

## H 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2019 0620/12/M/J/19 

**37** Which statement about homologous series is **not** correct? 

 A All homologous series are hydrocarbons. 

 B Members of a homologous series have the same functional group. 

 C Members of a homologous series have similar chemical properties. 

 D The alkanes are an example of a homologous series. 

**38** Which statements about ethanol are correct? 

 1 It can be made by fermentation. 

 2 It is an unsaturated compound. 

 3 It burns in air and can be used as a fuel. 

 A 1, 2 and 3 B 1 and 2 only C 1 and 3 only D 2 and 3 only 

**39** What are the properties of aqueous ethanoic acid? 

 decolourises bromine water 

 reacts with calcium carbonate to make carbon dioxide 

 turns damp red litmus blue 

## A    

## B    

## C    

## D    

**40** Which polymers are found in foods? 

 1 carbohydrates 

 2 poly(ethene) 

 3 protein 

 4 Terylene 

 A 1 only B 1 and 3 C 2 and 4 D 3 and 4 


© UCLES 2019 0620/12/M/J/19 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements 

(^1) H hydrogen 1 (^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III IV V^ VI VII VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Be beryllium 9 atomic number atomic symbol **Key**^ name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mg magnesium 24 19 K potassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Sr strontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Ge germanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 (^22) Tititanium (^4840) Zr zirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rf rutherfordium 

- 

 23 V vanadium 

(^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Cr chromium (^5242) Mo molybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sg seaborgium 

- 

(^25) Mn manganese (^5543) Tc technetium – (^75) Re rhenium^186107 Bhbohrium 

- 

(^26) Feiron (^5644) Ru ruthenium^101 (^76) Ososmium (^190108) Hs hassium 

- 

(^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Iriridium (^192109) Mt meitnerium 

- 

(^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pd palladium^106 (^78) Ptplatinum (^195110) Ds darmstadtium 

- 

(^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rg roentgenium 

- 

(^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cd cadmium^112 (^80) Hgmercury (^201112) Cn copernicium 

- 

 114 F 

 l flerovium 

- 

(^116) Lv livermorium 

- 

(^7) N nitrogen^1415 Pphosphorus^3133 Asarsenic^7551 Sbantimony^12283 Bibismuth^209 (^8) O oxygen^1616 Ssulfur^3234 Seselenium^7952 Tetellurium^12884 Popolonium 

- 

(^9) F fluorine^1917 C _l_ chlorine35.5^35 Brbromine^8053 I iodine 12785 At astatine 

- 

(^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Sc scandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71 lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) La lanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). actinium 

- 

(^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium (^14191) Pa protactinium 231 (^60) Nd neodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pm promethium – (^93) Np neptunium 

- 

(^62) Sm samarium^150 (^94) Pu plutonium 

- 

(^63) Eu europium^152 (^95) Am americium 

- 

(^64) Gd gadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bk berkelium 

- 

(^66) Dy dysprosium 16398 Cf californium 

- 

(^67) Ho holmium^165 (^99) Es einsteinium 

- 

(^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Md mendelevium 

- 

(^70) Yb ytterbium^173102 Nonobelium 

- 

(^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lr lawrencium 

- 


