 This syllabus is regulated for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 17 printed pages and 3 blank pages. 

 IB19 06_0620_22/3RP © UCLES 2019 [Turn over 

# *6592304997* 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/22 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) May/June 2019 

 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 20. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/22/M/J/19 

**1** The apparatus shown is set up. After 20 minutes a white ring of ammonium chloride is seen at position Y. 

 cotton wool soaked in concentrated ammonia solution 

 cotton wool soaked in concentrated hydrochloric acid 

 Y 

 white ring of ammonium chloride 

 Which statement about the molecules of ammonia and hydrogen chloride is correct? 

 A Molecules in ammonia have a larger M r than molecules of hydrogen chloride and so they move more slowly. 

 B Molecules in ammonia have a larger M r than molecules of hydrogen chloride and so they move more quickly. 

 C Molecules in ammonia have a smaller M r than molecules of hydrogen chloride and so they move more slowly. 

 D Molecules in ammonia have a smaller M r than molecules of hydrogen chloride and so they move more quickly. 

**2** A student measures 25.00 cm^3 of dilute hydrochloric acid accurately. 

 Which apparatus is most suitable? 

 A beaker 

 B measuring cylinder 

 C burette 

 D dropping pipette 


© UCLES 2019 0620/22/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**3** The chromatogram of solutions of two metal ions, P and Q, is shown. 

## P 

## Q 

 baseline 

 solvent front 

 P is coloured. A locating agent is used to find the position of Q. 

 The R f value of each solution is calculated. 

 P is a ......1...... element and has an R f value ......2...... than that of Q. 

 Which words complete gaps 1 and 2? 

## 1 2 

 A non-transition greater 

 B non-transition smaller 

 C transition greater 

 D transition smaller 

**4** What is an isotope of 1531 E? 

**A** (^) 1431 E **B**^3315 E **C** (^) 1631 E **D**^3316 E **5** Which row describes the formation of single covalent bonds in methane? **A** atoms share a pair of electrons both atoms gain a noble gas electronic structure **B** atoms share a pair of electrons both atoms have the same number of electrons in their outer shell **C** electrons are transferred from one atom to another both atoms gain a noble gas electronic structure **D** electrons are transferred from one atom to another both atoms have the same number of electrons in their outer shell 


© UCLES 2019 0620/22/M/J/19 

**6** Which statement describes the structure of an ionic compound? 

 A It is a giant lattice of oppositely charged ions. 

 B It is a giant lattice of positive ions in a ‘sea’ of electrons. 

 C It is a giant molecule of oppositely charged ions. 

 D It is a simple molecule of oppositely charged ions. 

**7** Calcium metal reacts with water to form a solution of calcium hydroxide and hydrogen gas. 

 Which equation is correct? 

 A Ca(s) + H 2 O(aq) → CaOH(aq) + H(g) 

 B Ca(s) + 2H 2 O(aq) → Ca(OH) 2 (s) + 2H 2 (g) 

 C Ca(s) + 2H 2 O(l) → Ca(OH) 2 (aq) + H 2 (g) 

 D Ca(s) + H 2 O(l) → CaOH(l) + H(g) 

**8** 25.0 cm^3 of 0.100 mol / dm^3 aqueous sodium hydroxide is neutralised by 24.6 cm^3 of dilute sulfuric acid. 

 What is the concentration of the dilute sulfuric acid? 

 A 0.0508 mol / dm^3 

 B 0.0984 mol / dm^3 

 C 0.102 mol / dm^3 

 D 0.203 mol / dm^3 


© UCLES 2019 0620/22/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**9** The diagram shows the electrolysis of an aqueous solution of X using inert electrodes. 

 aqueous solution of X 

## – + 

 power supply 

 Hydrogen is produced at the cathode and chlorine is produced at the anode. 

 What is X? 

# A concentrated copper(II) chloride solution 

 B concentrated hydrochloric acid 

 C dilute hydrochloric acid 

 D dilute sodium chloride solution 

**10** Aluminium is extracted by electrolysis as shown. 

– (^) + + – graphite anode graphite cathode steel case aluminium oxide dissolved in molten cryolite molten aluminium Which row shows the ionic half-equations at the cathode and the anode? cathode anode **A** A _l_ 3+^ → A _l_ + 3e –^ 2O2–^ → O 2 + 4e – **B** A _l_ 3+^ → A _l_ + 3e –^ 2O2–^ + 4e –^ → O 2 **C** A _l_ 3+^ + 3e –^ → A _l_ 2O2–^ → O 2 + 4e – **D** A _l_ 3+^ + 3e –^ → A _l_ 2O2–^ + 4e –^ → O 2 


© UCLES 2019 0620/22/M/J/19 

**11** Fuel cells are used as energy sources in cars. 

 Which row gives a fuel used in a fuel cell and the products formed? 

 fuel in a fuel cell products formed 

 A hydrogen carbon dioxide and water 

 B hydrogen water only 

 C petrol carbon dioxide and water 

 D petrol water only 

**12** Two elements, X and Y, react together to form a covalent molecule as shown. 

 The reaction is exothermic. 

 X 2 (g) + Y 2 (g) → 2XY(g) 

 The bond energies are shown in the table. 

 bond bond energy inkJ / mol 

## X–X 436 

## Y–Y 242 

## X–Y 431 

 What is the energy change for the reaction? 

 A +184 kJ / mol B –184 kJ / mol C +247 kJ / mol D –247 kJ / mol 

**13** Which change in reaction conditions increases both the collision rate and the proportion of molecules with sufficient energy to react? 

 A addition of a catalyst 

 B increasing the concentration of a reactant 

 C increasing the surface area of a reactant 

 D increasing the temperature of the reaction 


© UCLES 2019 0620/22/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

# 14 When blue-green crystals of nickel(II) sulfate are heated, water is produced and a yellow solid 

 remains. When water is added to the yellow solid, the blue-green colour returns. 

 Which process describes these changes? 

 A combustion 

 B corrosion 

 C neutralisation 

 D reversible reaction 

**15** The equation for the manufacture of ethanol is shown. 

 C 2 H 4 (g) + H 2 O(g) C 2 H 5 OH(g) ethene steam ethanol 

 What is the effect of doubling the pressure on this reaction? 

 A decreases the rate of formation of ethanol 

 B increases the yield of ethene 

 C decreases the rate of formation of ethene 

 D increases the yield of ethanol 

**16** The ionic equation for the reaction of aqueous potassium bromide with chlorine gas is shown. 

2Br –^ + C _l_ (^) 2 → Br 2 + 2C _l_ – Which statement is correct? **A** Bromide ions are oxidised by gaining electrons. **B** Bromide ions are oxidised by losing electrons. **C** Chlorine is oxidised by gaining electrons. **D** Chlorine is oxidised by losing electrons. **17** Which type of oxide are carbon monoxide and aluminium oxide? carbon monoxide aluminium oxide **A** acidic amphoteric **B** acidic basic **C** neutral amphoteric **D** neutral basic 


© UCLES 2019 0620/22/M/J/19 

**18** The positions of elements W, X, Y and Z in the Periodic Table are shown. 

## W 

## X 

## Y 

## Z 

 Which elements form basic oxides? 

 A W, X and Y B W and X only C Y only D Z only 

**19** Which row shows the difference between a weak acid and a strong acid? 

 weak acid strong acid 

 A fully ionised partially ionised 

 B concentrated dilute 

 C dilute concentrated 

 D partially ionised fully ionised 

**20** Part of the Periodic Table is shown. 

## Y Z 

## X 

 Which row describes the properties of X, Y and Z? 

 good conductor of electricity 

 high melting point 

 A X Z 

 B Y Z and X 

 C Y and Z Z 

 D Z and X X 


© UCLES 2019 0620/22/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**21** The melting points and boiling points of the elements of Group I of the Periodic Table are shown. 

 element 

 melting point / °C 

 boiling point / °C 

 lithium 181 1330 

 sodium 98 883 

 potassium 63 759 

 rubidium 39 688 

 caesium 28 671 

 Which pair of elements are liquid at 800 °C? 

 A caesium and rubidium 

 B potassium and sodium 

 C lithium and sodium 

 D potassium and caesium 

**22** The electronic structures of helium, neon and argon are shown. 

 He Ne Ar 

 Which row describes these gases? 

 reactivity form of the gas electronic structure 

 A reactive monoatomic incomplete outer shell of electrons 

 B unreactive diatomic complete outer shell of electrons 

 C unreactive diatomic incomplete outer shell of electrons 

 D unreactive monoatomic complete outer shell of electrons 


© UCLES 2019 0620/22/M/J/19 

**23** The diagrams show the structure of two substances used to make electrical conductors. 

 X Y 

 Which statement correctly describes X and Y? 

 A X is a pure metal and Y is a compound. 

 B X is a pure metal and Y is an alloy. 

 C X is a solid and Y is a liquid. 

 D X is harder and stronger than Y. 

**24** A student heated the carbonates and nitrates of sodium and copper. 

 The results are shown. 

 compound heated gases released solid formed 

 1 sodium carbonate carbon monoxide sodium oxide 

# 2 copper(II) carbonate carbon dioxide copper 

 3 sodium nitrate oxygen only sodium nitrite 

# 4 copper(II) nitrate nitrogen dioxide and oxygen copper(II) oxide 

 Which rows describe the correct results? 

 A 1 and 3 B 2 and 3 C 3 and 4 D 4 only 

**25** Zinc is extracted from its ore, zinc blende, using two chemical reactions. 

 1 2ZnS + 3O 2 → 2ZnO + 2SO 2 

 2 2ZnO + C → 2Zn + CO 2 

 Which substance is reduced in reactions 1 and 2? 

 reaction 1 reaction 2 

 A O 2 C 

 B O 2 ZnO 

 C ZnS C 

 D ZnS ZnO 


© UCLES 2019 0620/22/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**26** Four metals, zinc, M, copper and magnesium, are reacted with aqueous solutions of their nitrates. 

 The results are shown. 

 metal magnesiumnitrate nitrateM coppernitrate nitratezinc 

 magnesium    key 

 zinc    = reacts 

 M    = no reaction 

 copper    

 What is the order of reactivity of these four metals starting with the most reactive? 

 A copper → zinc → M → magnesium 

 B copper → M → zinc → magnesium 

 C magnesium → M → zinc → copper 

 D magnesium → zinc → M → copper 

**27** Which property of aluminium makes it useful in the manufacture of aircraft? 

 A conducts electricity 

 B high boiling point 

 C low density 

 D silver colour 

**28** The exhaust gases from cars contain oxides of nitrogen. 

 How are these oxides of nitrogen formed? 

 A Nitrogen and oxygen from the air react together at the high temperatures in the engine. 

 B Nitrogen and oxygen from the petrol react together in the car exhaust. 

 C Nitrogen from the petrol reacts with oxygen at the high temperatures in the engine. 

 D Nitrogen reacts with oxygen from the air in the catalytic converter. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/22/M/J/19 

**29** Water can be treated by filtration then chlorination. 

 Which uses do not need water of this quality? 

 1 water for cooling in industry 

 2 water for washing clothes 

 3 water for drinking 

 A 1, 2 and 3 B 1 and 2 only C 1 and 3 only D 2 and 3 only 

**30** Some of the processes involved in the carbon cycle are shown. 

 1 glucose + oxygen → carbon dioxide + water 

 2 carbon dioxide + water → glucose + oxygen 

 3 methane + oxygen → carbon dioxide + water 

 What are the names of these processes? 

## 1 2 3 

 A combustion respiration photosynthesis 

 B photosynthesis combustion respiration 

 C respiration combustion photosynthesis 

 D respiration photosynthesis combustion 

**31** The diagram shows an experiment to investigate how paint affects the rusting of iron. 

 air 

## P Q 

 water 

 iron painted iron 

 What happens to the water level in tubes P and Q? 

 tube P tube Q 

 A falls rises 

 B no change rises 

 C rises falls 

 D rises no change 


© UCLES 2019 0620/22/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**32** Ammonia is produced in the Haber process. 

 The equation for the reaction is shown. 

 3H 2 (g) + N 2 (g) 2NH 3 (g) 

 The forward reaction is exothermic. 

 Which conditions of temperature and pressure produce the highest yield of ammonia? 

 temperature pressure 

 A high high 

 B high low 

 C low high 

 D low low 

**33** Which row shows the conditions used in the Contact process? 

 temperature / °C 

 pressure / atm catalyst 

 A 25 2 iron 

 B 25 200 iron 

# C 450 2 vanadium(V) oxide 

# D 450 200 vanadium(V) oxide 


© UCLES 2019 0620/22/M/J/19 

**34** The diagram represents a lime kiln used to heat limestone to a very high temperature. 

 air in 

 fuel in fuel in 

 air in 

## X 

 waste gases 

 limestone 

 lime kiln 

 What leaves the kiln at X? 

 A calcium carbonate 

 B calcium hydroxide 

 C calcium oxide 

 D calcium sulfate 

**35** Which fuel could be gasoline? 

 Is it obtained from petroleum? 

 Is it used as fuel for cars? 

 Is it used as fuel for cars? 

 yes no 

 yes no 

## A B C D 

 yes no 


© UCLES 2019 0620/22/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**36** Which statement about homologous series is **not** correct? 

 A All homologous series are hydrocarbons. 

 B Members of a homologous series have the same functional group. 

 C Members of a homologous series have similar chemical properties. 

 D The alkanes are an example of a homologous series. 

**37** In bright sunlight, ethane and chlorine combine in substitution reactions. 

 Which compound is not formed in these reactions? 

**A** C 2 H 3 C _l_ **B** C 2 H 5 C _l_ **C** C 2 H 4 C _l_ (^) 2 **D** HC _l_ **38** What are the properties of aqueous ethanoic acid? decolourises bromine water reacts with calcium carbonate to make carbon dioxide turns damp red litmus blue 

## A    

## B    

## C    

## D    

**39** The structures of four molecules are shown. 

## C 

## O 

## OH 

## O 

## OH 

## H 

## 1 

## C OH 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## 2 

## C OH 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## 3 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## H C 

## 4 

 Which molecules react together to form the ester propyl methanoate? 

 A 1 and 2 B 1 and 3 C 2 and 4 D 3 and 4 


© UCLES 2019 0620/22/M/J/19 

**40** But-1-ene has the structure CH 3 CH 2 CH=CH 2. 

 What is the structure of poly(but-1-ene)? 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## A 

## H 

## C 

## H 

H (^) _n_ 

## C 

CH (^3) 

## H 

## C 

CH (^3) 

## H 

## C 

 n n 

## C 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## D 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

CH 2 CH 3 CH 2 CH 3 CH 2 CH (^3) 

## H 

## B 

 n 


## BLANK PAGE 

© UCLES 2019 0620/22/M/J/19 


## BLANK PAGE 

© UCLES 2019 0620/22/M/J/19 


## BLANK PAGE 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2019 0620/22/M/J/19 


© UCLES 2019 0620/22/M/J/19 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements 

(^1) H hydrogen 1 (^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III IV V^ VI VII VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Be beryllium 9 atomic number atomic symbol **Key**^ name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mg magnesium 24 19 K potassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Sr strontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Ge germanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 (^22) Tititanium (^4840) Zr zirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rf rutherfordium 

- 

 23 V vanadium 

(^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Cr chromium (^5242) Mo molybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sg seaborgium 

- 

(^25) Mn manganese (^5543) Tc technetium – (^75) Re rhenium^186107 Bhbohrium 

- 

(^26) Feiron (^5644) Ru ruthenium^101 (^76) Ososmium (^190108) Hs hassium 

- 

(^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Iriridium (^192109) Mt meitnerium 

- 

(^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pd palladium^106 (^78) Ptplatinum (^195110) Ds darmstadtium 

- 

(^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rg roentgenium 

- 

(^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cd cadmium^112 (^80) Hgmercury (^201112) Cn copernicium 

- 

 114 F 

 l flerovium 

- 

(^116) Lv livermorium 

- 

(^7) N nitrogen^1415 Pphosphorus^3133 Asarsenic^7551 Sbantimony^12283 Bibismuth^209 (^8) O oxygen^1616 Ssulfur^3234 Seselenium^7952 Tetellurium^12884 Popolonium 

- 

(^9) F fluorine^1917 C _l_ chlorine35.5^35 Brbromine^8053 I iodine 12785 At astatine 

- 

(^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Sc scandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71 lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) La lanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). actinium 

- 

(^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium (^14191) Pa protactinium 231 (^60) Nd neodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pm promethium – (^93) Np neptunium 

- 

(^62) Sm samarium^150 (^94) Pu plutonium 

- 

(^63) Eu europium^152 (^95) Am americium 

- 

(^64) Gd gadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bk berkelium 

- 

(^66) Dy dysprosium 16398 Cf californium 

- 

(^67) Ho holmium^165 (^99) Es einsteinium 

- 

(^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Md mendelevium 

- 

(^70) Yb ytterbium^173102 Nonobelium 

- 

(^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lr lawrencium 

- 


