 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. IB18 06_0620_12/3RP© UCLES 2018 [Turn over 

## *8053932751* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

### CHEMISTRY 0620/12 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) May/June 2018 Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet^ 45 minutes Soft clean eraserSoft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil.Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unlessthis has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

There areanswers **A** (^) , **forty B** , **C** questions on this paper. Answerand **D**. **all** questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the **one** you consider correct and record your choice in **soft pencil** on the separate Answer Sheet. **Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully.** Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer.Any rough working should be done in this booklet. A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16.Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2018 0620/12/M/J/18 

**1** When iodine is heated it turns from a solid to a gas. When liquid ammonia is cooled it turns into a solid. When ice is heated it turns into water. Which terms describe these changes of state? when iodineis heated when liquidammonia is cooled is heatedwhen ice **A** boiling freezing melting **B** freezing sublimation boiling **C** sublimation condensation freezing **D** sublimation freezing melting 

**2** Which piece of apparatus **cannot** be used to collect and measure the volume of gas produced in an experiment? **A** burette **B** gas syringe **C** measuring cylinder **D** pipette 

**3** Pure ethanol has a melting point of –114 °C and a boiling point of 78 °C. What are the melting and boiling points of a sample of ethanol with glucose dissolved in it? melting point / °C 

 boiling point / °C A –116 77 B –116 79 C –112 77 D –112 79 

**4** Which atom has an equal number of protons, neutrons and electrons? **A**^40 Ar **B**^1 H **C**^23 Na **D**^14 N 


© UCLES 2018 0620/12/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**5** Which description of brass is correct? **A** alloy **B** compound **C** element **D** non-metal 

**6** The bonding between elements X and Y in compound XY 2 is shown. 

# Y X Y 

 Which row shows the type of bond in XY 2 and the type of element X? type of bond type of element X A covalent metal B covalent non-metal C ionic metal D ionic non-metal 

**7** The ‘lead’ in a pencil is made of a mixture of graphite and clay. 

 ‘lead’ 

 When the percentage of graphite is increased, the pencil slides across the paper more easily. Which statement explains this observation? A Graphite has a high melting point. B Graphite is a form of carbon. C Graphite is a lubricant. D Graphite is a non-metal. 


© UCLES 2018 0620/12/M/J/18 

**8** The equation for the reaction between magnesium and dilute sulfuric acid is shown. The _M_ r of MgSO 4 is 120. Mg + H 2 SO 4 → MgSO 4 + H 2 Which mass of magnesium sulfate is formed when 12 g of magnesium completely reacts with dilute sulfuric acid? **A** 5 g **B** 10 g **C** 60 g **D** 120 g 

## 9 The electrolysis of molten lead(II) bromide is shown. 

 power supply 

 + – 

 molten 

## lead(II) bromide 

 Which statement describes what happens at the negative electrode? A Bromide ions gain electrons to form bromine molecules. B Bromine molecules gain electrons to form bromide ions. C Lead atoms lose electrons to form lead ions. D Lead ions gain electrons to form lead atoms. 

**10** Which statement about the combustion of fuels is correct? **A** It always produces carbon dioxide. **B** It always produces carbon monoxide. **C** It is always endothermic. **D** It is always exothermic. 


© UCLES 2018 0620/12/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**11** Which statement about chemical reactions is correct? **A** Endothermic reactions show a temperature decrease because energy is absorbed from the surroundings. **B** Endothermic reactions show a temperature increase because energy is released into the surroundings. **C** Exothermic reactions show a temperature increase because energy is absorbed from thesurroundings. **D** Exothermic reactions show a temperature decrease because energy is released into the surroundings. 

**12** The diagram shows a rate of reaction experiment. 

 excess dilute hydrochloric acid at 25 °C 

 hydrogen 

 magnesium Increasing the concentration of the acid and increasing the temperature both affect the rate ofreaction. 

 Which row is correct? increase the concentrationof acid increase the temperature A decrease rate of reaction decrease rate of reaction B decrease rate of reaction increase rate of reaction C increase rate of reaction decrease rate of reaction D increase rate of reaction increase rate of reaction 


© UCLES 2018 0620/12/M/J/18 

**13** Reaction X shows a test for water. Reaction Y occurs in the blast furnace for extracting iron. 

reaction X CoC _l_ (^) 2 + 6H 2 O CoC _l_ (^) 2 .6H 2 O reaction Y C + CO 2 → 2CO Reaction X is ......1....... In reaction Y, the oxide CO 2 is ......2....... Which words correctly complete gaps 1 and 2? 1 2 **A** irreversible oxidised **B** irreversible reduced **C** reversible oxidised **D** reversible reduced **14** Which equation shows an oxidation reaction? **A** C + O 2 → CO 2 **B** CaCO 3 → CaO + CO (^2) **C** CaO + 2HC _l_ → CaC _l_ (^) 2 + H 2 O **D** N 2 O 4 → 2NO 2 **15** Which two gases each give the same result for the test shown? test gas 1 gas 2 **A** damp blue litmus paper ammonia chlorine **B** damp blue litmus paper ammonia oxygen **C** lighted splint hydrogen chlorine **D** lighted splint hydrogen oxygen **16** Which statement about oxides is correct? **A** A solution of magnesium oxide has a pH less than pH 7. **B** A solution of sulfur dioxide has a pH greater than pH 7. **C** Magnesium oxide reacts with nitric acid to make a salt. **D** Sulfur dioxide reacts with hydrochloric acid to make a salt. 


© UCLES 2018 0620/12/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

## 17 Which methods are suitable for preparing both zinc sulfate and copper(II) sulfate? 

 1 reacting the metal oxide with warm dilute aqueous sulfuric acid 2 reacting the metal with dilute aqueous sulfuric acid 3 reacting the metal carbonate with dilute aqueous sulfuric acid A 1, 2 and 3 B 1 and 2 only C 1 and 3 only D 2 and 3 only 

**18** Two separate tests are done on separate solutions of compound X. 1 Addition of aqueous sodium hydroxide forms a green precipitate that dissolves in anexcess of aqueous sodium hydroxide. 2 Addition of dilute nitric acid and aqueous silver nitrate forms a white precipitate. What is compound X? 

## A chromium(III) carbonate 

## B chromium(III) chloride 

## C iron(II) carbonate 

## D iron(II) chloride 

**19** Which statement about the Periodic Table is correct? **A** Elements in the same group have the same number of electron shells. **B** It contains elements arranged in order of increasing proton number. **C** Metals are on the right and non-metals are on the left. **D** The most reactive elements are at the bottom of every group. 

**20** Chlorine, bromine and iodine are elements in Group VII of the Periodic Table. Which statement about these elements is **not** correct? **A** The colour gets darker down the group. **B** The density increases down the group. **C** They are all gases at room temperature and pressure. **D** They are all non-metals. 


© UCLES 2018 0620/12/M/J/18 

**21** Which row describes the properties of a transition element? 

 property 1 property 2 A forms colourless compounds acts as a catalyst B forms colourless compounds low electrical conductivity C high density acts as a catalyst D high density low electrical conductivity 

**22** Which statement about the elements in Group VIII is correct? **A** They all form diatomic molecules. **B** They all have eight electrons in their outer shells. **C** They all react with oxygen to form oxides. **D** They are all gases at room temperature. 

**23** Stainless steel is an alloy of iron, carbon and other metals. Which row is correct? 

 harder than pure ironstainless steel is stainless steel resistscorrosion better than pure iron A   B   C   D   


© UCLES 2018 0620/12/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**24** A student is given metal Z and its oxide. The student does some experiments to find out the position of metal Z in the reactivity series. The results are shown. ● Metal Z reacted slowly with dilute hydrochloric acid. ● Metal Z reacted slowly with steam but not with water. ● The oxide of metal Z reacted when heated with carbon. Which statement about the position of metal Z in the reactivity series is correct? **A** It is between calcium and sodium. **B** It is between copper and hydrogen. **C** It is between hydrogen and iron. **D** It is between magnesium and calcium. 

**25** Iron is produced from iron ore in a blast furnace. 

 waste gases 

 slag 

 hot air molten iron 

 raw materials 

 zone 3 

 zone 2 

 zone 1 

 Which equation represents the main reaction that happens in zone 1? A C(s) + CO 2 (g) → 2CO(g) B C(s) + O 2 (g) → CO 2 (g) C Fe 2 O 3 (s) + 3CO(g) → 2Fe(l) + 3CO 2 (g) D Fe 3 O 4 (s) + CO(g) → 3FeO(s) + CO 2 (g) 


© UCLES 2018 0620/12/M/J/18 

**26** Which row describes the use of an alloy and the property upon which the use depends? 

 alloy use property A mild steel cutlery resistant to corrosion B mild steel machinery strong C stainless steel cutlery low density D stainless steel machinery good conductor of electricity 

**27** Dry air is passed over hot copper until all the oxygen has reacted. 

 heat 

 dry air copper 

 The volume of gas at the end of the reaction is 120 cm^3. What is the starting volume of dry air? A 132 cm^3 B 152 cm^3 C 180 cm^3 D 570 cm^3 

**28** A steel bicycle which had been left outdoors for several months was starting to rust. What would **not** reduce the rate of corrosion? **A** Remove the rust and paint the bicycle. **B** Remove the rust and store the bicycle in a dry shed. **C** Remove the rust and wipe the bicycle with a clean, damp cloth. **D** Remove the rust and wipe the bicycle with an oily cloth. 


© UCLES 2018 0620/12/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**29** Which statements about water are correct? 1 Household water contains dissolved salts. 2 Water for household use is filtered to remove soluble impurities. 3 Water is treated with chlorine to kill bacteria. 4 Water is used in industry for cooling. **A** 1, 2, 3 and 4 **B** 1, 2 and 3 only **C** 1, 3 and 4 only **D** 2, 3 and 4 only 

**30** Ammonium nitrate is a common fertiliser used by farmers to increase the yield of their crops. Which compound reacts with ammonium nitrate to form ammonia? **A** calcium hydroxide **B** potassium nitrate **C** sodium chloride **D** sodium phosphate 

**31** Which process does **not** release a greenhouse gas? **A** digestion of food in cows **B** reaction between zinc and hydrochloric acid **C** respiration by animals **D** thermal decomposition of calcium carbonate 

**32** Which row describes the uses of sulfur and sulfur dioxide? 

 sulfur sulfur dioxide A extraction of aluminium food preservative B extraction of aluminium water treatment C manufacture of sulfuric acid food preservative D manufacture of sulfuric acid water treatment 


© UCLES 2018 0620/12/M/J/18 

**33** Limestone is used in many industrial processes. In which process is it **not** used? **A** manufacture of alkenes **B** manufacture of cement **C** manufacture of iron **D** manufacture of lime 

**34** Lime is used to treat an industrial waste. 

 lime 

 untreated waste 

 treated waste 

 Which change occurs in the treatment? untreated waste treated waste A acidic → neutral B alkaline → acidic C alkaline → neutral D neutral → acidic 

**35** What is **not** the correct use of the fraction named? 

 name of fraction use A fuel oil making waxes B gas oil fuel in diesel engines C kerosene jet fuel D naphtha making chemicals 


© UCLES 2018 0620/12/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**36** Four organic compounds are listed. ethane ethanoic acid ethanol ethene Which bond do all four compounds contain? **A** C–C **B** C–H **C** C–O **D** O–H 

**37** Which compounds belong to the same homologous series? **A** ethane and propane **B** ethanoic acid and ethanol **C** methane and ethene **D** propene and ethanoic acid 

**38** Which substances can be obtained by cracking hydrocarbons? **A** ethanol and ethene **B** ethanol and hydrogen **C** ethene and hydrogen **D** ethene and poly(ethene) 

**39** The equations for two important processes used to manufacture ethanol are shown. process 1 C 6 H 12 O 6 → 2C 2 H 5 OH + 2CO 2 process 2 C 2 H 4 + H 2 O → C 2 H 5 OH Which statement is **not** correct? **A** Both processes require a catalyst. **B** Both processes use a starting material obtained from petroleum. **C** Process 1 shows the production of a renewable fuel. **D** Process 2 is an addition reaction. 


© UCLES 2018 0620/12/M/J/18 

**40** Part of the label on the packet of a potato product is shown. 

 This potato product contains: starch ethanoic acidsodium chloride sugar Which constituent is a natural polymer? A ethanoic acid B sodium chloride C starch D sugar 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeInternational Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge LocalExaminations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2018 0620/12/M/J/18 

### BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2018 0620/12/M/J/18 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements^1 Hhydrogen^1 

(^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Beberyllium 9 **Key** atomic numberatomic symbol name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mgmagnesium 24 19 Kpotassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Srstrontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Gegermanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 (^22) Tititanium (^4840) Zrzirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rfrutherfordium– 23 Vvanadium (^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Crchromium (^5242) Momolybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sgseaborgium– (^25) Mnmanganese (^5543) Tctechnetium– (^75) Rerhenium (^186107) Bhbohrium– (^26) Feiron (^5644) Ruruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Ir iridium (^192109) Mtmeitnerium– (^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pdpalladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Dsdarmstadtium– (^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rgroentgenium– (^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cdcadmium (^11280) Hgmercury (^201112) Cncopernicium– 114 F _l_ flerovium– (^116) Lvlivermorium– (^7) Nnitrogen 1415 Pphosphorus (^3133) Asarsenic (^7551) Sbantimony 12283 Bibismuth 209 (^8) Ooxygen 1616 Ssulfur (^3234) Seselenium (^7952) Tetellurium (^12884) Popolonium– (^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Brbromine 8053 I iodine 12785 Atastatine– (^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Scscandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) Lalanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). actinium– (^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium^141 (^91) Paprotactinium 231 (^60) Ndneodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pmpromethium– (^93) Npneptunium– (^62) Smsamarium (^15094) Puplutonium– (^63) Eueuropium (^15295) Amamericium– (^64) Gdgadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bkberkelium– (^66) Dydysprosium 16398 Cfcalifornium– (^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Eseinsteinium– (^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Mdmendelevium– (^70) Ybytterbium (^173102) Nonobelium– (^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lrlawrencium– 


