 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 13 printed pages and 3 blank pages. IB18 06_0620_21/3RP© UCLES 2018 [Turn over 

# *1264661612* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/21 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) May/June 2018 Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet^ 45 minutes Soft clean eraserSoft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil.Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unlessthis has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

There areanswers **A** (^) , **forty B** , **C** questions on this paper. Answerand **D**. **all** questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the **one** you consider correct and record your choice in **soft pencil** on the separate Answer Sheet. **Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully.** Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer.Any rough working should be done in this booklet. A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16.Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2018 0620/21/M/J/18 

**1** A student investigated the diffusion of ammonia gas, NH 3 , and hydrogen chloride gas, HC _l_. Two sets of apparatus were set up as shown at room temperature and pressure. 

 apparatus 1 

 source of ammonia gas 

 damp red litmus paper 

 apparatus 2 

 source of hydrogen chloride gas 

 damp blue litmus paper 

 The damp red litmus paper in apparatus 1 changed colour after 30 seconds. How long does it take for the damp blue litmus paper to change colour in apparatus 2? A 64 seconds B 30 seconds C 21 seconds D The blue litmus paper would not change colour. 

**2** Chromatography is a technique used to separate coloured dyes. Which dye has an _R_ f value of 0.7? solvent front 

 baseline A B dyes C D 


© UCLES 2018 0620/21/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**3** Which piece of apparatus is used to measure exactly 26.3 cm^3 of a liquid? **A B C D** 

**4** The ‘lead’ in a pencil is made of a mixture of graphite and clay. 

 ‘lead’ 

 When the percentage of graphite is increased, the pencil slides across the paper more easily. Which statement explains this observation? A Graphite has a high melting point. B Graphite is a form of carbon. C Graphite is a lubricant. D Graphite is a non-metal. 


© UCLES 2018 0620/21/M/J/18 

**5** Chlorine exists as two common isotopes, 35 C _l_ and 37 C _l_. Information about these two isotopes is shown. number of protons 

 number of neutrons 

 number of electron shells 

(^35) C _l_ 17 18 3 (^37) C _l_ 17 20 3 Which statement explains why the two isotopes are of the same element? **A** Both have the same number of electron shells. **B** Both have the same number of protons. **C** Both have 7 outer shell electrons. **D**^37 C _l_ has 2 more neutrons than 35 C _l_. **6** Which substance is **not** a macromolecule? **A** diamond **B** graphite 

# C silicon(IV) oxide 

 D sulfur 

**7** Copper is a metallic element. Which statements about copper are correct? 1 Copper is malleable because layers of ions are in fixed positions and cannot move. 2 The structure of copper consists of negative ions in a lattice. 3 Copper conducts electricity because electrons can move through the metal. 4 Electrons hold copper ions together in a lattice by electrostatic attraction. **A** 1 and 2 **B** 2, 3 and 4 **C** 2 and 3 only **D** 3 and 4 only 

**8** The equation for the combustion of ethane is shown. 2C 2 H 6 + 7O 2 → 4CO 2 + 6H 2 O Which volume of carbon dioxide, at room temperature and pressure, is formed when 0.5 moles of ethane burn? **A** 48 dm^3 **B** 24 dm^3 **C** 12 dm^3 **D** 6 dm^3 


© UCLES 2018 0620/21/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**9** A solution of ethanoic acid, CH 3 COOH, has a concentration of 2 mol / dm^3. Which statement about this solution is correct? **A** 20 g of ethanoic acid is dissolved in 10 cm^3 of water. **B** 30 g of ethanoic acid is dissolved in 250 cm^3 of water. **C** 60 g of ethanoic acid is dissolved in 1 dm^3 of water. **D** 120 g of ethanoic acid is dissolved in 2 dm^3 of water. 

# 10 Aqueous copper(II) sulfate is electrolysed using copper electrodes. 

 Which statement is correct? A A reduction reaction occurs at the positive electrode. B The blue colour of the solution becomes darker. C The concentration of copper ions in the solution decreases. D The mass of the negative electrode increases. 

**11** Dilute sulfuric acid is electrolysed using inert electrodes. What are the ionic half-equations for the reactions that take place at each electrode? positive electrode negative electrode **A** 2H+^ + 2e –^ → H 2 4OH–^ → 2H 2 O + O 2 + 4e – **B** 2H+^ + 2e –^ → H 2 4OH–^ + 4H +^ → 4H 2 O **C** 4OH–^ → 2H 2 O + O 2 + 4e –^ 2H+^ + 2e –^ → H 2 **D** 4OH–^ + 4H +^ → 4H 2 O 2H+^ + 2e –^ → H 2 

**12** Plant cells use energy from sunlight for photosynthesis. Which row describes and explains the energy change that occurs? type of energy change explanation **A** endothermic less energy is released making bonds than is absorbed to break bonds **B** endothermic more energy is released making bonds than is absorbed to break bonds **C** exothermic less energy is released making bonds than is absorbed to break bonds **D** exothermic more energy is released making bonds than is absorbed to break bonds 


© UCLES 2018 0620/21/M/J/18 

**13** Hydrogen bromide decomposes to form hydrogen and bromine. The equation is shown. 2HBr(g) → H 2 (g) + Br 2 (g) The bond energies are shown in the table. The reaction is endothermic. bond bond energyin kJ / mol Br–Br +193 H–Br +366 H–H +436 What is the energy change for the reaction? **A** +263 kJ / mol **B** +103 kJ / mol **C** –103 kJ / mol **D** –263 kJ / mol 

**14** Which row describes the effects of increasing both concentration and temperature on the collisions between reacting particles? increasing concentration increasing temperature **A** more collisions per second only more collisions per second only 

**B** (^) collisions with sufficient energy to reactmore collisions per second and more more collisions per second only **C** more collisions per second only more collisions per second and more collisions with sufficient energy to react **D** (^) collisions with sufficient energy to reactmore collisions per second and more collisions with sufficient energy to reactmore collisions per second and more **15** The formation of sulfur trioxide is a reversible reaction. The equation is shown. 2SO 2 (g) + O 2 (g) 2SO 3 (g) The forward reaction is exothermic. Which conditions produce the highest equilibrium yield of sulfur trioxide? pressure temperature **A** high high **B** high low **C** low high **D** low low 


© UCLES 2018 0620/21/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**16** Chlorine displaces iodide ions from potassium iodide. 

C _l_ (^) 2 + 2I–^ → I 2 + 2C _l_ – What is the oxidising agent? **A** chloride ions **B** chlorine **C** iodide ions **D** iodine **17** Which statement about oxides is correct? **A** A solution of magnesium oxide has a pH less than pH 7. **B** A solution of sulfur dioxide has a pH greater than pH 7. **C** Magnesium oxide reacts with nitric acid to make a salt. **D** Sulfur dioxide reacts with hydrochloric acid to make a salt. **18** Which solution has the lowest pH? **A** 0.1 mol / dm^3 ammonia solution **B** 0.1 mol / dm^3 ethanoic acid **C** 0.1 mol / dm^3 lithium hydroxide **D** 0.1 mol / dm^3 nitric acid **19** A student mixes silver nitrate and barium chloride to form a white precipitate of silver chloride. The equation is shown. 2AgNO 3 + BaC _l_ (^) 2 → 2AgC _l_ + Ba(NO 3 ) (^2) Which row describes the solubility of the salts? soluble insoluble **A** silver nitrate barium chloride, barium nitrate and silver chloride **B** silver nitrate and barium chloride barium nitrate and silver chloride **C** silver nitrate, barium chloride and barium nitrate silver chloride **D** silver nitrate, barium chloride and silver chloride barium nitrate 


© UCLES 2018 0620/21/M/J/18 

# 20 Which methods are suitable for preparing both zinc sulfate and copper(II) sulfate? 

 1 reacting the metal oxide with warm dilute aqueous sulfuric acid 2 reacting the metal with dilute aqueous sulfuric acid 3 reacting the metal carbonate with dilute aqueous sulfuric acid A 1, 2 and 3 B 1 and 2 only C 1 and 3 only D 2 and 3 only 

**21** Which element is in the same period of the Periodic Table as silicon? **A** germanium **B** scandium **C** sodium **D** strontium 

**22** Which statement about the halogens is correct? **A** A sample of bromine reacts with potassium chloride solution. **B** A sample of bromine reacts with potassium iodide solution. **C** A sample of chlorine has a higher density than a sample of bromine. **D** A sample of chlorine is a darker colour than a sample of bromine. 

**23** Which row shows the catalytic activity of transition elements and their compounds? 

 transition elementscatalytic activity of catalytic activity of compounds oftransition elements A good good B good poor C poor good D poor poor 

**24** The following statements are made about the metals copper, iron, magnesium and zinc. 1 Their oxides are acidic. 2 They all conduct electricity in the solid state. 3 They all have high melting points. 4 They all react with dilute acids to form hydrogen. Which statements are correct? **A** 1 and 2 **B** 1 and 4 **C** 2 and 3 **D** 3 and 4 


© UCLES 2018 0620/21/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**25** Silver is a less reactive metal than cadmium. Cadmium is a less reactive metal than barium. Which statement is correct? **A** Barium does not react when heated with silver oxide. **B** Cadmium displaces barium from a solution of barium chloride. **C** Cadmium displaces silver from a solution of silver nitrate. **D** Cadmium reacts when heated with barium oxide. 

**26** Aluminium metal is extracted from aluminium oxide using electrolysis. Which statement about the extraction process is **not** correct? **A** A large amount of electricity is required. **B** Molten cryolite is used to dissolve the aluminium oxide. **C** Oxygen gas is released which reacts to form carbon dioxide. **D** The negative electrodes burn away and have to be replaced. 

**27** Which statement explains why aluminium is used in the manufacture of aircraft? **A** It conducts heat well. **B** It has a low density. **C** It is a good conductor of electricity. **D** It is easy to recycle. 

**28** Dry air is passed over hot copper until all the oxygen has reacted. 

 heat 

 dry air copper 

 The volume of gas at the end of the reaction is 120 cm^3. What is the starting volume of dry air? A 132 cm^3 B 152 cm^3 C 180 cm^3 D 570 cm^3 


© UCLES 2018 0620/21/M/J/18 

**29** A steel bicycle which had been left outdoors for several months was starting to rust. What would **not** reduce the rate of corrosion? **A** Remove the rust and paint the bicycle. **B** Remove the rust and store the bicycle in a dry shed. **C** Remove the rust and wipe the bicycle with a clean, damp cloth. **D** Remove the rust and wipe the bicycle with an oily cloth. 

**30** Which statements about water are correct? 1 Household water contains dissolved salts. 2 Water for household use is filtered to remove soluble impurities. 3 Water is treated with chlorine to kill bacteria. 4 Water is used in industry for cooling. **A** 1, 2, 3 and 4 **B** 1, 2 and 3 only **C** 1, 3 and 4 only **D** 2, 3 and 4 only 

**31** Ammonia is manufactured by reacting hydrogen with nitrogen in the Haber process. Which row describes the sources of hydrogen and nitrogen and the conditions used in the manufacture of ammonia in the Haber process? 

 hydrogensource of source ofnitrogen temperature of reaction / °C reactionpressure of / atm A air natural gas 250 2 B air natural gas 250 200 C natural gas air 450 2 D natural gas air 450 200 

**32** Which statements about the carbon cycle are correct? 1 Carbon dioxide is added to the atmosphere by respiration. 2 Carbon dioxide is added to the atmosphere by combustion of coal. 3 Carbon dioxide is removed from the atmosphere by photosynthesis. **A** 1, 2 and 3 **B** 1 and 2 only **C** 1 and 3 only **D** 2 and 3 only 


© UCLES 2018 0620/21/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**33** Which statement about sulfur and its compounds is **not** correct? **A** Sulfur dioxide is used as a food preservative. 

# B Sulfur dioxide turns acidified aqueous potassium manganate(VII) from purple to colourless. 

 C Sulfur forms a basic oxide. D Sulfur is used in the manufacture of sulfuric acid. 

**34** Which process is used to convert limestone (calcium carbonate) into lime? **A** electrolysis **B** fractional distillation **C** incomplete combustion **D** thermal decomposition 

**35** What is **not** the correct use of the fraction named? 

 name of fraction use A fuel oil making waxes B gas oil fuel in diesel engines C kerosene jet fuel D naphtha making chemicals 

**36** Which reaction is **not** a reaction which alkenes undergo? **A** bromination **B** hydration **C** hydrogenation **D** hydrolysis 

**37** Which substances can be obtained by cracking hydrocarbons? **A** ethanol and ethene **B** ethanol and hydrogen **C** ethene and hydrogen **D** ethene and poly(ethene) 


© UCLES 2018 0620/21/M/J/18 

**38** Ethanol is produced by fermentation or from ethene. What is a disadvantage of producing ethanol by fermentation? **A** Distillation is needed to purify the ethanol produced. **B** Fermentation uses glucose from plants. **C** Fermentation is catalysed by enzymes in yeast. **D** Fermentation occurs at a low temperature and pressure. 

**39** Which structural formula represents methyl propanoate? **A** CH 3 CH 2 COOCH 3 **B** CH 3 COOCH 2 CH 2 CH 3 **C** CH 3 CH 2 CH 2 COOCH 3 **D** HCOOCH 2 CH 2 CH 3 

**40** Which row describes addition polymerisation and condensation polymerisation? 

 addition polymerisation condensation polymerisation A monomers have a C=C double bondand the polymer is the only product monomers have a C=C double bondand the polymer is the only product B monomers have a C=C double bondand the polymer is the only product the monomers react to form thepolymer and a small molecule C the monomers react to form thepolymer and a small molecule monomers have a C=C double bondand the polymer is the only product D the monomers react to form thepolymer and a small molecule the monomers react to form thepolymer and a small molecule 


© UCLES 2018 0620/21/M/J/18 

## BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2018 0620/21/M/J/18 

## BLANK PAGE 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeInternational Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge LocalExaminations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2018 0620/21/M/J/18 

## BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2018 0620/21/M/J/18 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements^1 Hhydrogen^1 

(^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Beberyllium 9 **Key** atomic numberatomic symbol name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mgmagnesium 24 19 Kpotassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Srstrontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Gegermanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 (^22) Tititanium (^4840) Zrzirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rfrutherfordium– 23 Vvanadium (^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Crchromium (^5242) Momolybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sgseaborgium– (^25) Mnmanganese (^5543) Tctechnetium– (^75) Rerhenium (^186107) Bhbohrium– (^26) Feiron (^5644) Ruruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Ir iridium (^192109) Mtmeitnerium– (^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pdpalladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Dsdarmstadtium– (^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rgroentgenium– (^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cdcadmium (^11280) Hgmercury (^201112) Cncopernicium– 114 F _l_ flerovium– (^116) Lvlivermorium– (^7) Nnitrogen 1415 Pphosphorus (^3133) Asarsenic (^7551) Sbantimony 12283 Bibismuth 209 (^8) Ooxygen 1616 Ssulfur (^3234) Seselenium (^7952) Tetellurium (^12884) Popolonium– (^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Brbromine 8053 I iodine 12785 Atastatine– (^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Scscandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) Lalanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). actinium– (^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium^141 (^91) Paprotactinium 231 (^60) Ndneodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pmpromethium– (^93) Npneptunium– (^62) Smsamarium (^15094) Puplutonium– (^63) Eueuropium (^15295) Amamericium– (^64) Gdgadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bkberkelium– (^66) Dydysprosium 16398 Cfcalifornium– (^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Eseinsteinium– (^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Mdmendelevium– (^70) Ybytterbium (^173102) Nonobelium– (^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lrlawrencium– 


