 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 14 printed pages and 2 blank pages. 

 IB18 06_0620_23/3RP © UCLES 2018 [Turn over 

# *8762427084* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/23 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) May/June 2018 

 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2018 0620/23/M/J/18 

**1** Ammonia gas is reacted with hydrogen chloride gas using the apparatus shown. 

 Solid ammonium chloride is produced. 

 cotton wool soaked in ammonia solution 

 cotton wool soaked in hydrogen chloride solution 

 long glass tube solid ammonium chloride 

 Which statement explains why the solid ammonium chloride is formed nearer to the hydrogen chloride? 

 A Ammonia solution is a base and hydrogen chloride solution is an acid. 

 B Ammonia molecules diffuse more slowly than hydrogen chloride molecules. 

 C Hydrogen chloride has a greater molecular mass than ammonia. 

 D Hydrogen chloride moves by Brownian motion. 

**2** Paper chromatography is done in the same way with three different mixtures of dyes. Each mixture contains at least one of the dyes W, X, Y and Z. 

 The R f values of the dyes in the three mixtures are shown. 

 dye 

 R f values from mixture 1 

 R f values from mixture 2 

 R f values from mixture 3 

 W 0.15 0.15 0.15 

 X 0.00 0.00 0.00 

 Y 0.50 0.50 0.50 

 Z 0.00 0.91 0.91 

 Which conclusion is correct? 

 A Dye W is nearest the solvent front and is present only in mixture 1 and mixture 3. 

 B Dye X has travelled furthest up the chromatography paper. 

 C Dye Y is the only dye present in all three mixtures. 

 D Dye Z is nearest the solvent front and is found in only two of the mixtures. 


© UCLES 2018 0620/23/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**3** Solid R reacted with dilute sulfuric acid. 

 The initial temperature of the dilute sulfuric acid and the final temperature of the solution are shown. 

## 25 

## 20 

## 15 

## 10 

## 25 

## 20 

## 15 

## 10 

 initial temperature of the dilute sulfuric acid (°C) 

 final temperature of the solution (°C) 

 What was the change in temperature in °C? 

 A – 6 B – 4 C 4 D 6 

**4** The ‘lead’ in a pencil is made of a mixture of graphite and clay. 

 ‘lead’ 

 When the percentage of graphite is increased, the pencil slides across the paper more easily. 

 Which statement explains this observation? 

 A Graphite has a high melting point. 

 B Graphite is a form of carbon. 

 C Graphite is a lubricant. 

 D Graphite is a non-metal. 

**5** Iron has an atomic number of 26. It occurs as the isotopes 54 Fe, 56 Fe, 57 Fe and 58 Fe. 

 Which statement explains why these isotopes have the same chemical properties? 

 A They have similar mass numbers. 

 B They have the same number of electrons in their outer shells. 

 C They have the same number of neutrons in their nuclei. 

 D They have the same number of protons in their nuclei. 


© UCLES 2018 0620/23/M/J/18 

# 6 How many silicon atoms are bonded to each oxygen atom in a crystal of silicon(IV) oxide? 

## A 1 B 2 C 3 D 4 

**7** Which substance is **not** a macromolecule? 

 A diamond 

 B graphite 

# C silicon(IV) oxide 

 D sulfur 

**8** An experiment was done to determine the formula of a hydrocarbon, C (^) xH (^) y. 10 cm^3 of the gaseous hydrocarbon, C (^) xH (^) y, was burned in an excess of oxygen to form 20 cm^3 of carbon dioxide and 30 cm^3 of water vapour. What is C (^) xH (^) y? **A** CH 4 **B** C 2 H 4 **C** C 2 H 6 **D** C 3 H 8 **9** 4.00 g of solid sodium hydroxide is added to water to make a solution with a concentration of 0.200 mol / dm^3. What is the volume of water used? **A** 0.5 cm^3 **B** 20 cm^3 **C** 500 cm^3 **D** 2000 cm^3 

# 10 Aqueous copper(II) sulfate is electrolysed using copper electrodes. 

 Which statement is correct? 

 A Oxygen gas is produced at the positive electrode. 

 B The blue colour of the solution gradually fades. 

 C The concentration of copper ions in the solution stays the same. 

 D The mass of the negative electrode decreases. 


© UCLES 2018 0620/23/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**11** Dilute sulfuric acid is electrolysed using inert electrodes. 

 What are the ionic half-equations for the reactions that take place at each electrode? 

 positive electrode negative electrode 

 A 2H+^ + 2e –^ → H 2 4OH–^ → 2H 2 O + O 2 + 4e – 

 B 2H+^ + 2e –^ → H 2 4OH–^ + 4H +^ → 4H 2 O 

 C 4OH–^ → 2H 2 O + O 2 + 4e –^ 2H+^ + 2e –^ → H 2 

 D 4OH–^ + 4H +^ → 4H 2 O 2H+^ + 2e –^ → H 2 

**12** Information about two reactions is given. 

- The neutralisation reaction between citric acid and sodium hydrogencarbonate is endothermic. 

- The displacement reaction between magnesium and carbon dioxide is exothermic. 

 Which statements about the two reactions are correct? 

 1 The energy of the products formed in the neutralisation reaction is greater than the energy of the reactants. 

 2 The energy of magnesium and carbon dioxide is greater than the energy of magnesium oxide and carbon. 

 3 In an exothermic reaction, the energy required to break the bonds is greater than the energy released when the new bonds are formed. 

 A 1, 2 and 3 B 1 and 2 only C 1 and 3 only D 2 and 3 only 

**13** Ethene reacts with hydrogen. The equation is shown. 

 CH 2 =CH 2 + H 2 → C 2 H 6 

 The bond energies are shown in the table. The reaction is exothermic. 

 bond 

 bond energy in kJ / mol 

 C–C +350 

 C=C +610 

 C–H +410 

 H–H +436 

 What is the energy change for the reaction? 

 A –560 kJ / mol B –124 kJ / mol C +486 kJ / mol D +5496 kJ / mol 


© UCLES 2018 0620/23/M/J/18 

**14** Which row describes the effects of increasing both concentration and temperature on the collisions between reacting particles? 

 increasing concentration increasing temperature 

 A more collisions per second only more collisions per second only 

 B more collisions per second and more collisions with sufficient energy to react 

 more collisions per second only 

 C more collisions per second only more collisions per second and more collisions with sufficient energy to react 

 D more collisions per second and more collisions with sufficient energy to react 

 more collisions per second and more collisions with sufficient energy to react 

**15** In the Contact process, sulfur dioxide is converted into sulfur trioxide in a reversible reaction. 

 2SO 2 (g) + O 2 (g) 2SO 3 (g) 

 The forward reaction is exothermic. 

 Which conditions give the highest yield of sulfur trioxide at equilibrium? 

 pressure / atmospheres temperature 

 A 0.5 high 

 B 0.5 low 

 C 1.5 high 

 D 1.5 low 

**16** The equation for a redox reaction is shown. 

 2Fe 3+^ + Zn → 2Fe 2+^ + Zn 2+ 

 Which statements are correct? 

 1 Fe 3+^ is reduced to form Fe 2+. 

 2 Zn oxidises the Fe 3+^ ions. 

 3 Fe 3+^ is an oxidising agent. 

 A 1, 2 and 3 B 1 and 2 only C 1 and 3 only D 2 and 3 only 


© UCLES 2018 0620/23/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**17** Which statement about oxides is correct? 

 A A solution of magnesium oxide has a pH less than pH 7. 

 B A solution of sulfur dioxide has a pH greater than pH 7. 

 C Magnesium oxide reacts with nitric acid to make a salt. 

 D Sulfur dioxide reacts with hydrochloric acid to make a salt. 

**18** The equation represents an equilibrium in aqueous ammonia. 

 NH 3 (aq) + H 2 O(l) NH 4 +(aq) + OH–(aq) 

 How does aqueous ammonia behave in this reaction? 

 A as a strong acid 

 B as a strong base 

 C as a weak acid 

 D as a weak base 

**19** An excess of aqueous sodium sulfate was added to aqueous barium chloride and the mixture was filtered. 

 Which row shows the identity of the residue and the substances present in the filtrate? 

 residue substances in filtrate 

 A barium sulfate barium chloride and sodium chloride 

 B barium sulfate sodium chloride and sodium sulfate 

 C sodium chloride barium chloride and sodium sulfate 

 D sodium chloride barium sulfate and sodium sulfate 

# 20 Which methods are suitable for preparing both zinc sulfate and copper(II) sulfate? 

 1 reacting the metal oxide with warm dilute aqueous sulfuric acid 

 2 reacting the metal with dilute aqueous sulfuric acid 

 3 reacting the metal carbonate with dilute aqueous sulfuric acid 

 A 1, 2 and 3 B 1 and 2 only C 1 and 3 only D 2 and 3 only 


© UCLES 2018 0620/23/M/J/18 

**21** Which element is classified as a non-metal in the Periodic Table? 

 A calcium 

 B chlorine 

 C chromium 

 D copper 

**22** Part of the Periodic Table is shown. 

 Element Q has a low boiling point, low density and does not conduct electricity. 

 Which element is Q? 

## B 

## C D 

## A 

**23** Which row describes a typical transition element? 

 density in g / cm^3 

 melting point in °C 

 boiling point in °C 

 colour of oxide 

 A 0.97 98 883 white 

 B 2.64 769 1382 white 

 C 3.10 –7 59 yellow 

 D 8.96 1085 2562 red 

**24** Which diagram represents a solid alloy? 

 A B C D 


© UCLES 2018 0620/23/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**25** The ionic equations for four reactions are shown. 

 Z + X2+^ → Z 2+^ + X 

 Z + 2W +^ → Z 2+^ + 2W 

 X + 2W +^ → X2+^ + 2W 

 Y + Z 2+^ → Y2+^ + Z 

 What is the order of reactivity of the four metals, W, X, Y and Z? 

 most reactive 

 least reactive 

 A W X Z Y 

 B X W Y Z 

 C Y Z X W 

 D Z W X Y 

**26** Which equation represents the first stage in the extraction of zinc from zinc blende? 

 A 2ZnS + 3O 2 → 2ZnO + 2SO 2 

 B ZnS + H 2 O → ZnO + H 2 S 

 C ZnO + CO → Zn + CO 2 

 D ZnO + H 2 SO 4 → ZnSO 4 + H 2 O 

**27** Which statement explains why aluminium is used to manufacture aircraft? 

 A It has a low density. 

 B It is a good conductor of electricity. 

 C It is a good conductor of heat. 

 D It is ductile. 


© UCLES 2018 0620/23/M/J/18 

**28** Dry air is passed over hot copper until all the oxygen has reacted. 

 heat 

 dry air copper 

 The volume of gas at the end of the reaction is 120 cm^3. 

 What is the starting volume of dry air? 

 A 132 cm^3 B 152 cm^3 C 180 cm^3 D 570 cm^3 

**29** A steel bicycle which had been left outdoors for several months was starting to rust. 

 What would not reduce the rate of corrosion? 

 A Remove the rust and paint the bicycle. 

 B Remove the rust and store the bicycle in a dry shed. 

 C Remove the rust and wipe the bicycle with a clean, damp cloth. 

 D Remove the rust and wipe the bicycle with an oily cloth. 

**30** Which statements about water are correct? 

 1 Household water contains dissolved salts. 

 2 Water for household use is filtered to remove soluble impurities. 

 3 Water is treated with chlorine to kill bacteria. 

 4 Water is used in industry for cooling. 

 A 1, 2, 3 and 4 

 B 1, 2 and 3 only 

 C 1, 3 and 4 only 

 D 2, 3 and 4 only 


© UCLES 2018 0620/23/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**31** Ammonia is manufactured by reacting hydrogen with nitrogen in the Haber process. 

 Which row describes the sources of hydrogen and nitrogen and the conditions used in the manufacture of ammonia in the Haber process? 

 source of hydrogen 

 source of nitrogen 

 temperature of reaction / °C 

 pressure of reaction / atm 

 A air natural gas 250 2 

 B air natural gas 250 200 

 C natural gas air 450 2 

 D natural gas air 450 200 

**32** Which statements about the carbon cycle are correct? 

 1 Carbon dioxide is added to the atmosphere by respiration. 

 2 Carbon dioxide is added to the atmosphere by combustion of coal. 

 3 Carbon dioxide is removed from the atmosphere by photosynthesis. 

 A 1, 2 and 3 B 1 and 2 only C 1 and 3 only D 2 and 3 only 

**33** Element Z forms an oxide, ZO 2. Three uses of ZO 2 are listed. 

 ● bleaching agent 

 ● killing bacteria 

 ● manufacturing an important acid 

 What is Z? 

 A carbon 

 B lead 

 C nitrogen 

 D sulfur 


© UCLES 2018 0620/23/M/J/18 

**34** Limestone is an important material with many uses. 

 Limestone is heated to produce ......1...... and carbon dioxide. 

 This reaction is called ......2....... 

 Which words correctly complete gaps 1 and 2? 

## 1 2 

 A lime neutralisation 

 B lime thermal decomposition 

 C slaked lime neutralisation 

 D slaked lime thermal decomposition 

**35** What is **not** the correct use of the fraction named? 

 name of fraction use 

 A fuel oil making waxes 

 B gas oil fuel in diesel engines 

 C kerosene jet fuel 

 D naphtha making chemicals 

**36** Methane, ethane and propane belong to a family of hydrocarbons called alkanes. 

 What is the general formula of an alkane? 

 A CnH2n B CnH2n+1 C CnH2n–1 D CnH2n+2 

**37** Which substances can be obtained by cracking hydrocarbons? 

 A ethanol and ethene 

 B ethanol and hydrogen 

 C ethene and hydrogen 

 D ethene and poly(ethene) 


© UCLES 2018 0620/23/M/J/18 

**38** Which row describes an advantage and a disadvantage of making ethanol by fermentation? 

 advantage disadvantage 

 A uses a renewable resource occurs at a slow rate 

 B needs a high temperature produces impure ethanol as a product 

 C produces pure ethanol as a product needs a high temperature 

 D occurs at a slow rate uses a non-renewable resource 

**39** Which esters have the molecular formula C 5 H 10 O 2? 

 1 ethyl propanoate 

 2 propyl ethanoate 

 3 butyl methanoate 

 4 methyl butanoate 

 A 1, 2, 3 and 4 

 B 1, 2 and 3 only 

 C 1 and 2 only 

 D 3 and 4 only 

**40** A polymer linkage contains carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen and oxygen atoms. 

 Which row about the polymer is correct? 

 type of polymer formed by 

 A polyamide addition polymerisation 

 B polyamide condensation polymerisation 

 C polyester addition polymerisation 

 D polyester condensation polymerisation 


© UCLES 2018 0620/23/M/J/18 

## BLANK PAGE 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2018 0620/23/M/J/18 

## BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2018 0620/23/M/J/18 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements 

(^1) H hydrogen 1 (^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III IV V^ VI VII VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Be beryllium 9 atomic number atomic symbol **Key**^ name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mg magnesium 24 19 K potassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Sr strontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Ge germanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 (^22) Tititanium (^4840) Zr zirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rf rutherfordium 

- 

 23 V vanadium 

(^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Cr chromium (^5242) Mo molybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sg seaborgium 

- 

(^25) Mn manganese (^5543) Tc technetium – (^75) Re rhenium^186107 Bhbohrium 

- 

(^26) Feiron (^5644) Ru ruthenium^101 (^76) Ososmium (^190108) Hs hassium 

- 

(^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Ir iridium (^192109) Mt meitnerium 

- 

(^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pd palladium^106 (^78) Ptplatinum (^195110) Ds darmstadtium 

- 

(^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rg roentgenium 

- 

(^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cd cadmium^112 (^80) Hgmercury (^201112) Cn copernicium 

- 

 114 F 

 l flerovium 

- 

(^116) Lv livermorium 

- 

(^7) N nitrogen^1415 Pphosphorus^3133 Asarsenic^7551 Sbantimony^12283 Bibismuth^209 (^8) O oxygen^1616 Ssulfur^3234 Seselenium^7952 Tetellurium^12884 Popolonium 

- 

(^9) F fluorine^1917 C _l_ chlorine35.5^35 Brbromine^8053 I iodine 12785 At astatine 

- 

(^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Sc scandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71 lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) La lanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). actinium 

- 

(^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium (^14191) Pa protactinium 231 (^60) Nd neodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pm promethium – (^93) Np neptunium 

- 

(^62) Sm samarium^150 (^94) Pu plutonium 

- 

(^63) Eu europium^152 (^95) Am americium 

- 

(^64) Gd gadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bk berkelium 

- 

(^66) Dy dysprosium 16398 Cf californium 

- 

(^67) Ho holmium^165 (^99) Es einsteinium 

- 

(^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Md mendelevium 

- 

(^70) Yb ytterbium^173102 Nonobelium 

- 

(^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lr lawrencium 

- 


