 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. 

 IB18 06_0620_13/3RP © UCLES 2018 [Turn over 

# *4491578785* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/13 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) May/June 2018 

 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2018 0620/13/M/J/18 

**1** Mineral wool soaked in aqueous ammonia is placed in the apparatus shown. 

 mineral wool soaked in aqueous ammonia 

 damp red litmus paper 

 After five minutes, the damp red litmus paper turned blue. 

 Which process led to this change? 

 A crystallisation 

 B diffusion 

 C distillation 

 D sublimation 

**2** Solid R reacted with dilute sulfuric acid. 

 The initial temperature of the dilute sulfuric acid and the final temperature of the solution are shown. 

## 25 

## 20 

## 15 

## 10 

## 25 

## 20 

## 15 

## 10 

 initial temperature of the dilute sulfuric acid (°C) 

 final temperature of the solution (°C) 

 What was the change in temperature in °C? 

 A – 6 B – 4 C 4 D 6 


© UCLES 2018 0620/13/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

# 3 The melting points of four impure samples of lead(II) bromide were measured. The results are 

 shown. 

 Which sample is the most pure? 

 temperature when the sample started to melt / °C 

 temperature when the sample finished melting / °C 

 A 342 355 

 B 353 360 

 C 365 371 

 D 372 373 

**4** Symbols representing four particles are shown. 

(^4020) W (^4120) X 2 + (^3718) Y (^3717) Z The letters are not the chemical symbols. Which particles have the same number of neutrons? **A** W and X2+^ **B** W and Z **C** X2+^ and Y **D** Y and Z **5** Which name is given to a pure substance made from more than one type of atom? **A** alloy **B** compound **C** element **D** mixture 


© UCLES 2018 0620/13/M/J/18 

**6** The diagram shows solid element Q reacting with an acid to produce gas R. 

 solid element Q 

 gas R acid 

 Which row describes Q and R? 

## Q R 

 A metal element with covalent bonds 

 B metal element with ionic bonds 

 C non-metal compound with covalent bonds 

 D non-metal compound with ionic bonds 

**7** The ‘lead’ in a pencil is made of a mixture of graphite and clay. 

 ‘lead’ 

 When the percentage of graphite is increased, the pencil slides across the paper more easily. 

 Which statement explains this observation? 

 A Graphite has a high melting point. 

 B Graphite is a form of carbon. 

 C Graphite is a lubricant. 

 D Graphite is a non-metal. 

**8** The equation for the reaction between magnesium and dilute sulfuric acid is shown. 

 The M r of MgSO 4 is 120. 

 Mg + H 2 SO 4 → MgSO 4 + H 2 

 Which mass of magnesium sulfate is formed when 12 g of magnesium completely reacts with dilute sulfuric acid? 

 A 5 g B 10 g C 60 g D 120 g 


© UCLES 2018 0620/13/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**9** What is produced at each electrode when molten rubidium chloride is electrolysed using platinum electrodes? 

 positive electrode negative electrode 

 A chlorine hydrogen 

 B chlorine rubidium 

 C hydrogen chlorine 

 D rubidium chlorine 

**10** What is released when any fuel is burned? 

 A carbon dioxide 

 B heat energy 

 C smoke 

 D water 

**11** Group I metals react vigorously with water and release heat. 

 Which statement about this reaction is correct? 

 A The reaction is endothermic and the energy change is negative. 

 B The reaction is endothermic and the energy change is positive. 

 C The reaction is exothermic and the energy change is negative. 

 D The reaction is exothermic and the energy change is positive. 


© UCLES 2018 0620/13/M/J/18 

**12** The diagram shows a rate of reaction experiment. 

 excess dilute hydrochloric acid at 25 °C 

 hydrogen 

 magnesium 

 Increasing the concentration of the acid and increasing the temperature both affect the rate of reaction. 

 Which row is correct? 

 increase the concentration of acid increase the temperature 

 A decrease rate of reaction decrease rate of reaction 

 B decrease rate of reaction increase rate of reaction 

 C increase rate of reaction decrease rate of reaction 

 D increase rate of reaction increase rate of reaction 

**13** In a chemical reaction, blue compound X changed into white compound Y. 

 X → Y blue white 

 Which statement describes this reaction? 

# A Hydrated cobalt(II) chloride is heated. 

# B Hydrated copper(II) sulfate is heated. 

# C Water is added to anhydrous cobalt(II) chloride. 

# D Water is added to anhydrous copper(II) sulfate. 

**14** Which equation shows an oxidation reaction? 

 A C + O 2 → CO 2 

**B** CaCO 3 → CaO + CO (^2) **C** CaO + 2HC _l_ → CaC _l_ (^) 2 + H 2 O **D** N 2 O 4 → 2NO 2 


© UCLES 2018 0620/13/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**15** Pieces of damp red litmus paper and damp blue litmus paper are placed in three different gas jars. 

 gas jar 1 

 red litmus paper 

 blue litmus paper 

 ammonia 

 gas jar 2 

 chlorine 

 gas jar 3 

 oxygen 

 red litmus paper 

 blue litmus paper 

 red litmus paper 

 blue litmus paper 

 In which gas jars does at least one piece of litmus paper change colour? 

 A 1, 2 and 3 B 1 and 2 C 1 and 3 D 2 and 3 

**16** Which statement about oxides is correct? 

 A A solution of magnesium oxide has a pH less than pH 7. 

 B A solution of sulfur dioxide has a pH greater than pH 7. 

 C Magnesium oxide reacts with nitric acid to make a salt. 

 D Sulfur dioxide reacts with hydrochloric acid to make a salt. 

# 17 Which methods are suitable for preparing both zinc sulfate and copper(II) sulfate? 

 1 reacting the metal oxide with warm dilute aqueous sulfuric acid 

 2 reacting the metal with dilute aqueous sulfuric acid 

 3 reacting the metal carbonate with dilute aqueous sulfuric acid 

 A 1, 2 and 3 B 1 and 2 only C 1 and 3 only D 2 and 3 only 

**18** A white crystalline solid is dissolved in distilled water. 

 A small amount of dilute nitric acid is added followed by aqueous silver nitrate. 

 No visible change occurs. 

 What can be deduced about the white crystalline solid? 

 A It contains chloride ions. 

 B It does not contain ammonium ions. 

 C It does not contain carbonate ions. 

 D It must contain either sulfate or nitrate ions. 


© UCLES 2018 0620/13/M/J/18 

**19** Which element is classified as a non-metal in the Periodic Table? 

 A calcium 

 B chlorine 

 C chromium 

 D copper 

**20** Part of the Periodic Table is shown. 

 Element Q has a low boiling point, low density and does not conduct electricity. 

 Which element is Q? 

## B 

## C D 

## A 

**21** Which row describes a typical transition element? 

 density in g / cm^3 

 melting point in °C 

 boiling point in °C 

 colour of oxide 

 A 0.97 98 883 white 

 B 2.64 769 1382 white 

 C 3.10 –7 59 yellow 

 D 8.96 1085 2562 red 

**22** Helium is a noble gas. 

 Which statement is correct? 

 A A helium atom has eight electrons in its outer shell. 

 B Helium exists as diatomic molecules. 

 C Helium is used as an inert atmosphere in lamps. 

 D There are no naturally occurring chemical compounds of helium. 


© UCLES 2018 0620/13/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**23** Which diagram represents a solid alloy? 

 A B C D 

**24** Some reactions of three metals and their oxides are shown. 

 metal 

 metal reacts with steam 

 metal oxide reacts with carbon 

 X no yes 

 Y yes no 

 Z yes yes 

 What is the order of reactivity of the metals? 

 most reactive 

 least reactive 

 A X Z Y 

 B Y X Z 

 C Y Z X 

 D Z Y X 

**25** Which statement about the extraction of metals is correct? 

 A Aluminium is extracted from bauxite by electrolysis. 

 B Aluminium is extracted from hematite by heating with carbon. 

 C Iron is extracted from bauxite by heating with carbon. 

 D Iron is extracted from hematite by electrolysis. 

**26** Which statement explains why aluminium is used to manufacture aircraft? 

 A It has a low density. 

 B It is a good conductor of electricity. 

 C It is a good conductor of heat. 

 D It is ductile. 


© UCLES 2018 0620/13/M/J/18 

**27** Dry air is passed over hot copper until all the oxygen has reacted. 

 heat 

 dry air copper 

 The volume of gas at the end of the reaction is 120 cm^3. 

 What is the starting volume of dry air? 

 A 132 cm^3 B 152 cm^3 C 180 cm^3 D 570 cm^3 

**28** A steel bicycle which had been left outdoors for several months was starting to rust. 

 What would not reduce the rate of corrosion? 

 A Remove the rust and paint the bicycle. 

 B Remove the rust and store the bicycle in a dry shed. 

 C Remove the rust and wipe the bicycle with a clean, damp cloth. 

 D Remove the rust and wipe the bicycle with an oily cloth. 

**29** Which statements about water are correct? 

 1 Household water contains dissolved salts. 

 2 Water for household use is filtered to remove soluble impurities. 

 3 Water is treated with chlorine to kill bacteria. 

 4 Water is used in industry for cooling. 

 A 1, 2, 3 and 4 

 B 1, 2 and 3 only 

 C 1, 3 and 4 only 

 D 2, 3 and 4 only 


© UCLES 2018 0620/13/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**30** Fertilisers are often mixtures of solid compounds. 

 Which compounds can be mixed to provide the three elements needed for healthy plant growth? 

 A ammonium nitrate and calcium phosphate 

 B ammonium nitrate and potassium chloride 

 C ammonium phosphate and potassium chloride 

 D potassium chloride and calcium phosphate 

**31** Carbon dioxide and methane are both greenhouse gases which contribute to climate change. 

 Which statement explains how greenhouse gases contribute to climate change? 

 A They absorb heat radiation from the Earth. 

 B They absorb heat radiation from the Sun. 

 C They absorb light radiation from the Sun. 

 D They cause acid rain. 

**32** Element Z forms an oxide, ZO 2. Three uses of ZO 2 are listed. 

 ● bleaching agent 

 ● killing bacteria 

 ● manufacturing an important acid 

 What is Z? 

 A carbon 

 B lead 

 C nitrogen 

 D sulfur 


© UCLES 2018 0620/13/M/J/18 

**33** Limestone is an important material with many uses. 

 Limestone is heated to produce ......1...... and carbon dioxide. 

 This reaction is called ......2....... 

 Which words correctly complete gaps 1 and 2? 

## 1 2 

 A lime neutralisation 

 B lime thermal decomposition 

 C slaked lime neutralisation 

 D slaked lime thermal decomposition 

**34** Lime is used to treat an industrial waste. 

 lime 

 untreated waste 

 treated waste 

 Which change occurs in the treatment? 

 untreated waste treated waste 

 A acidic → neutral 

 B alkaline → acidic 

 C alkaline → neutral 

 D neutral → acidic 

**35** What is **not** the correct use of the fraction named? 

 name of fraction use 

 A fuel oil making waxes 

 B gas oil fuel in diesel engines 

 C kerosene jet fuel 

 D naphtha making chemicals 


© UCLES 2018 0620/13/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**36** Four organic compounds are listed. 

 ethane 

 ethanoic acid 

 ethanol 

 ethene 

 Which bond do all four compounds contain? 

 A C–C B C–H C C–O D O–H 

**37** The structures of some organic compounds are shown. 

 1 

## H C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## O H 

## 2 

## H C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## C H 

## H C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## C O H 

## 3 4 

## O 

## O 

## H C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

 Which compounds belong to the same homologous series? 

 A 1 and 2 B 1 and 3 C 2 and 3 D 3 and 4 

**38** Which substances can be obtained by cracking hydrocarbons? 

 A ethanol and ethene 

 B ethanol and hydrogen 

 C ethene and hydrogen 

 D ethene and poly(ethene) 


© UCLES 2018 0620/13/M/J/18 

**39** Sugars and ethene can both be made into ethanol using different reactions. 

 Which type of reaction is used in each case? 

 sugars to ethanol ethene to ethanol 

 A fermentation addition 

 B fermentation cracking 

 C incomplete combustion addition 

 D incomplete combustion cracking 

**40** Which substances are natural polymers? 

 ethanol protein starch vinegar 

 A     

 B     

 C     

 D     


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2018 0620/13/M/J/18 

## BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2018 0620/13/M/J/18 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements 

(^1) H hydrogen 1 (^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III IV V^ VI VII VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Be beryllium 9 atomic number atomic symbol **Key**^ name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mg magnesium 24 19 K potassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Sr strontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Ge germanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 (^22) Tititanium (^4840) Zr zirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rf rutherfordium 

- 

 23 V vanadium 

(^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Cr chromium (^5242) Mo molybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sg seaborgium 

- 

(^25) Mn manganese (^5543) Tc technetium – (^75) Re rhenium^186107 Bhbohrium 

- 

(^26) Feiron (^5644) Ru ruthenium^101 (^76) Ososmium (^190108) Hs hassium 

- 

(^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Ir iridium (^192109) Mt meitnerium 

- 

(^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pd palladium^106 (^78) Ptplatinum (^195110) Ds darmstadtium 

- 

(^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rg roentgenium 

- 

(^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cd cadmium^112 (^80) Hgmercury (^201112) Cn copernicium 

- 

 114 F 

 l flerovium 

- 

(^116) Lv livermorium 

- 

(^7) N nitrogen^1415 Pphosphorus^3133 Asarsenic^7551 Sbantimony^12283 Bibismuth^209 (^8) O oxygen^1616 Ssulfur^3234 Seselenium^7952 Tetellurium^12884 Popolonium 

- 

(^9) F fluorine^1917 C _l_ chlorine35.5^35 Brbromine^8053 I iodine 12785 At astatine 

- 

(^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Sc scandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71 lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) La lanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). actinium 

- 

(^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium (^14191) Pa protactinium 231 (^60) Nd neodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pm promethium – (^93) Np neptunium 

- 

(^62) Sm samarium^150 (^94) Pu plutonium 

- 

(^63) Eu europium^152 (^95) Am americium 

- 

(^64) Gd gadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bk berkelium 

- 

(^66) Dy dysprosium 16398 Cf californium 

- 

(^67) Ho holmium^165 (^99) Es einsteinium 

- 

(^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Md mendelevium 

- 

(^70) Yb ytterbium^173102 Nonobelium 

- 

(^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lr lawrencium 

- 


