 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 14 printed pages and 2 blank pages. IB18 06_0620_11/3RP© UCLES 2018 [Turn over 

# *9563332168* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/11 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) May/June 2018 Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet^ 45 minutes Soft clean eraserSoft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil.Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unlessthis has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

There areanswers **A** (^) , **forty B** , **C** questions on this paper. Answerand **D**. **all** questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the **one** you consider correct and record your choice in **soft pencil** on the separate Answer Sheet. **Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully.** Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer.Any rough working should be done in this booklet. A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16.Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2018 0620/11/M/J/18 

**1** The diagrams show particles in a container. 1 2 3 

 Which two diagrams show the process of evaporation? A 1 → 2 B 1 → 3 C 2 → 3 D 3 → 1 

**2** Which piece of apparatus is used to measure exactly 26.3 cm^3 of a liquid? **A B C D** 

**3** The melting points and boiling points of pure substances W, X and Y are shown. 

 W X Y melting point / °C –114 115 –101 boiling point / °C 78 445 –34 The substances are chlorine, ethanol and sulfur. Which row identifies W, X and Y? W X Y A chlorine ethanol sulfur B ethanol sulfur chlorine C sulfur chlorine ethanol D sulfur ethanol chlorine 


© UCLES 2018 0620/11/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**4** In which atom is the number of protons equal to the number of neutrons? **A**^40 Ar **B**^19 F **C**^23 Na **D**^16 O 

**5** Which row identifies an alloy, a pure metal and a non-metal? 

 alloy pure metal non-metal A brass carbon copper B brass copper carbon C copper brass carbon D copper carbon brass 

**6** A covalent molecule Q contains exactly six shared electrons. What is Q? **A** ammonia, NH 3 

**B** chlorine, C _l_ (^) 2 **C** methane, CH 4 **D** water, H 2 O **7** The ‘lead’ in a pencil is made of a mixture of graphite and clay. ‘lead’ When the percentage of graphite is increased, the pencil slides across the paper more easily. Which statement explains this observation? **A** Graphite has a high melting point. **B** Graphite is a form of carbon. **C** Graphite is a lubricant. **D** Graphite is a non-metal. 


© UCLES 2018 0620/11/M/J/18 

**8** The equation for the reaction between magnesium and dilute sulfuric acid is shown. The _M_ r of MgSO 4 is 120. Mg + H 2 SO 4 → MgSO 4 + H 2 Which mass of magnesium sulfate is formed when 12 g of magnesium completely reacts with dilute sulfuric acid? **A** 5 g **B** 10 g **C** 60 g **D** 120 g 

# 9 What is observed at each electrode when molten lead(II) bromide is electrolysed using platinum 

 electrodes? negative electrode positive electrode A bubbles of a colourless gas bubbles of a brown gas B bubbles of a colourless gas bubbles of a colourless gas C shiny grey liquid bubbles of a brown gas D shiny grey liquid bubbles of a colourless gas 

**10** Which gas is used as a fuel? **A** argon **B** hydrogen **C** nitrogen **D** oxygen 

**11** Burning fuels is an exothermic reaction. What is meant by the term _exothermic_? **A** A gas is produced. **B** Energy is released. **C** Heat is absorbed. **D** The mass of the fuel decreases. 


© UCLES 2018 0620/11/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**12** The diagram shows a rate of reaction experiment. 

 excess dilute hydrochloric acid at 25 °C 

 hydrogen 

 magnesium Increasing the concentration of the acid and increasing the temperature both affect the rate of reaction. Which row is correct? increase the concentrationof acid increase the temperature A decrease rate of reaction decrease rate of reaction B decrease rate of reaction increase rate of reaction C increase rate of reaction decrease rate of reaction D increase rate of reaction increase rate of reaction 

# 13 Water is added to anhydrous copper(II) sulfate. 

 What happens during the reaction? 

# A The copper(II) sulfate turns blue and the solution formed gets colder. 

# B The copper(II) sulfate turns blue and the solution formed gets hotter. 

# C The copper(II) sulfate turns white and the solution formed gets colder. 

# D The copper(II) sulfate turns white and the solution formed gets hotter. 

**14** Which equation shows an oxidation reaction? **A** C + O 2 → CO 2 

**B** CaCO 3 → CaO + CO (^2) **C** CaO + 2HC _l_ → CaC _l_ (^) 2 + H 2 O **D** N 2 O 4 → 2NO 2 


© UCLES 2018 0620/11/M/J/18 

**15** Dilute nitric acid is added to a solid, F. A gas, G, is produced which is denser than air and extinguishes a burning splint. What are F and G? solid F gas G **A** calcium hydrogen **B** calcium carbonate carbon dioxide **C** calcium hydroxide hydrogen **D** calcium oxide carbon dioxide 

**16** Which statement about oxides is correct? **A** A solution of magnesium oxide has a pH less than pH 7. **B** A solution of sulfur dioxide has a pH greater than pH 7. **C** Magnesium oxide reacts with nitric acid to make a salt. **D** Sulfur dioxide reacts with hydrochloric acid to make a salt. 

# 17 Which methods are suitable for preparing both zinc sulfate and copper(II) sulfate? 

 1 reacting the metal oxide with warm dilute aqueous sulfuric acid 2 reacting the metal with dilute aqueous sulfuric acid 3 reacting the metal carbonate with dilute aqueous sulfuric acid A 1, 2 and 3 B 1 and 2 only C 1 and 3 only D 2 and 3 only 


© UCLES 2018 0620/11/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**18** Two salt solutions, X and Y, are tested. The table shows the results. test X Y sodium hydroxide are addeda few drops of aqueous green precipitateformed precipitate formedred-brown a few drops of dilute nitric acid and a few drops of barium nitrate are added 

 no change seen white precipitate formed a few drops of silver nitrate are addeda few drops of dilute nitric acid and white precipitateformed no change seen What are X and Y? X Y 

# A iron(II) chloride iron(III) sulfate 

# B iron(III) chloride iron(III) sulfate 

# C iron(II) sulfate iron(III) chloride 

# D iron(III) sulfate iron(III) chloride 

**19** Which element is in the same period of the Periodic Table as silicon? **A** germanium **B** scandium **C** sodium **D** strontium 

**20** Which statement about the halogens is correct? **A** A sample of bromine reacts with potassium chloride solution. **B** A sample of bromine reacts with potassium iodide solution. **C** A sample of chlorine has a higher density than a sample of bromine. **D** A sample of chlorine is a darker colour than a sample of bromine. 


© UCLES 2018 0620/11/M/J/18 

**21** Which row shows the catalytic activity of transition elements and their compounds? 

 transition elementscatalytic activity of catalytic activity of compounds oftransition elements A good good B good poor C poor good D poor poor 

**22** Which statement about the noble gases is **not** correct? **A** Noble gases are diatomic molecules. **B** Noble gases are unreactive gases. **C** Noble gases have full outer electron shells. **D** The noble gas argon is used in lamps. 

**23** The following statements are made about the metals copper, iron, magnesium and zinc. 1 Their oxides are acidic. 2 They all conduct electricity in the solid state. 3 They all have high melting points. 4 They all react with dilute acids to form hydrogen. Which statements are correct? **A** 1 and 2 **B** 1 and 4 **C** 2 and 3 **D** 3 and 4 


© UCLES 2018 0620/11/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**24** Three metals, X, Y and Z, were reacted with water. The oxides of the same three metals were also heated strongly with carbon. The results are shown. metal reaction of the metal with water reaction of the metal oxidewith carbon X vigorous reactionwith cold water no reaction Y no reaction^ carbon dioxide producedmetal and Z no reaction observed with cold waterbut reaction observed with steam no reaction 

 What is a correct conclusion about X, Y and Z? A X is sodium and Y is magnesium. B X is the least reactive and Y is the most reactive. C Z is less reactive than Y. D Z is magnesium and Y is copper. 

**25** In a blast furnace, iron ore is mixed with coke and limestone, and heated in hot air. Compound R is formed. Compound R then reduces the iron ore to iron. Which equation shows the formation of compound R? **A** C + O 2 → CO 2 **B** CO 2 + C → 2CO 

**C** CaCO 3 → CaO + CO (^2) **D** CaO + SiO 2 → CaSiO 3 **26** Which statement explains why aluminium is used in the manufacture of aircraft? **A** It conducts heat well. **B** It has a low density. **C** It is a good conductor of electricity. **D** It is easy to recycle. 


© UCLES 2018 0620/11/M/J/18 

**27** Dry air is passed over hot copper until all the oxygen has reacted. 

 heat 

 dry air copper 

 The volume of gas at the end of the reaction is 120 cm^3. What is the starting volume of dry air? A 132 cm^3 B 152 cm^3 C 180 cm^3 D 570 cm^3 

**28** A steel bicycle which had been left outdoors for several months was starting to rust. What would **not** reduce the rate of corrosion? **A** Remove the rust and paint the bicycle. **B** Remove the rust and store the bicycle in a dry shed. **C** Remove the rust and wipe the bicycle with a clean, damp cloth. **D** Remove the rust and wipe the bicycle with an oily cloth. 

**29** Which statements about water are correct? 1 Household water contains dissolved salts. 2 Water for household use is filtered to remove soluble impurities. 3 Water is treated with chlorine to kill bacteria. 4 Water is used in industry for cooling. **A** 1, 2, 3 and 4 **B** 1, 2 and 3 only **C** 1, 3 and 4 only **D** 2, 3 and 4 only 

**30** Farmers use fertilisers to replace minerals in the soil that have been removed by the crops theygrow. 

 Which elements in the soil are replaced by adding fertilisers? A Ca, P, O B K, O, S C N, K, P D N, O, S 


© UCLES 2018 0620/11/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**31** Which statement is correct? **A** Atmospheric carbon dioxide is not a cause of climate change. **B** Atmospheric methane is produced by respiration. **C** Burning natural gas decreases the level of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. **D** Decomposition of vegetation causes an increase in atmospheric methane. 

**32** Which statement about sulfur and its compounds is **not** correct? **A** Sulfur dioxide is used as a food preservative. 

# B Sulfur dioxide turns acidified aqueous potassium manganate(VII) from purple to colourless. 

 C Sulfur forms a basic oxide. D Sulfur is used in the manufacture of sulfuric acid. 

**33** Which process is used to convert limestone (calcium carbonate) into lime? **A** electrolysis **B** fractional distillation **C** incomplete combustion **D** thermal decomposition 

**34** Lime is used to treat an industrial waste. 

 lime 

 untreated waste 

 treated waste 

 Which change occurs in the treatment? untreated waste treated waste A acidic → neutral B alkaline → acidic C alkaline → neutral D neutral → acidic 


© UCLES 2018 0620/11/M/J/18 

**35** What is **not** the correct use of the fraction named? 

 name of fraction use A fuel oil making waxes B gas oil fuel in diesel engines C kerosene jet fuel D naphtha making chemicals 

**36** Four organic compounds are listed. ethane ethanoic acid ethanol ethene Which bond do all four compounds contain? **A** C–C **B** C–H **C** C–O **D** O–H 

**37** The first three members of a homologous series are shown. 

 F C F 

## F 

## F 

## F C F 

## F 

## F 

## C 

## F 

## F 

## F C F 

## F 

## F 

## C 

## F 

## F 

## C 

## F 

## F 

 Why do these molecules represent a homologous series? A because they contain fluorine and carbon atoms B because they have saturated bonds C because they have the same functional group D because they react differently from each other 

**38** Which substances can be obtained by cracking hydrocarbons? **A** ethanol and ethene **B** ethanol and hydrogen **C** ethene and hydrogen **D** ethene and poly(ethene) 


© UCLES 2018 0620/11/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**39** Which reaction is used to make ethanol? **A** adding steam to ethene **B** addition polymerisation **C** fractional distillation of petroleum **D** reacting ethene with aqueous bromine 

**40** Polymers are long-chain molecules made from small molecules linked together. Four polymers or types of polymer are listed. 1 carbohydrates 2 nylon 3 proteins 4 _Terylene_ Which of these polymers or types of polymer are synthetic? **A** 1 and 3 **B** 1 and 4 **C** 2 and 3 **D** 2 and 4 


© UCLES 2018 0620/11/M/J/18 

## BLANK PAGE 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeInternational Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge LocalExaminations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2018 0620/11/M/J/18 

## BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2018 0620/11/M/J/18 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements^1 Hhydrogen^1 

(^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Beberyllium 9 **Key** atomic numberatomic symbol name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mgmagnesium 24 19 Kpotassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Srstrontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Gegermanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 (^22) Tititanium (^4840) Zrzirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rfrutherfordium– 23 Vvanadium (^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Crchromium (^5242) Momolybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sgseaborgium– (^25) Mnmanganese (^5543) Tctechnetium– (^75) Rerhenium (^186107) Bhbohrium– (^26) Feiron (^5644) Ruruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Ir iridium (^192109) Mtmeitnerium– (^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pdpalladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Dsdarmstadtium– (^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rgroentgenium– (^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cdcadmium (^11280) Hgmercury (^201112) Cncopernicium– 114 F _l_ flerovium– (^116) Lvlivermorium– (^7) Nnitrogen 1415 Pphosphorus (^3133) Asarsenic (^7551) Sbantimony 12283 Bibismuth 209 (^8) Ooxygen 1616 Ssulfur (^3234) Seselenium (^7952) Tetellurium (^12884) Popolonium– (^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Brbromine 8053 I iodine 12785 Atastatine– (^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Scscandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) Lalanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). actinium– (^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium^141 (^91) Paprotactinium 231 (^60) Ndneodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pmpromethium– (^93) Npneptunium– (^62) Smsamarium (^15094) Puplutonium– (^63) Eueuropium (^15295) Amamericium– (^64) Gdgadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bkberkelium– (^66) Dydysprosium 16398 Cfcalifornium– (^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Eseinsteinium– (^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Mdmendelevium– (^70) Ybytterbium (^173102) Nonobelium– (^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lrlawrencium– 


