 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 The teacher responsible for preparing the examination is not allowed to consult the Question Paper before the examination. Teachers should, as part of the preparation of the examination requirements, carry out any tests indicated on pages 2 and 3 in order to satisfy themselves that the supplied materials are satisfactory. 

 The Supervisor’s Report to be included with the scripts is given on pages 7 and 8. Please detach and enclose it with the scripts. If scripts are despatched in more than one envelope, it is essential that a copy of the Supervisor’s Results and of the Supervisor’s Report are sent inside each envelope. 

 More material may be issued if required, without penalty, but this should not be necessary. 

 Supervisors are advised to remind candidates that all substances in the examination should be treated with caution. Suitable eye protection should be provided. 

 In accordance with COSHH (Control of Substances Hazardous to Health) Regulations, operative in the UK, a hazard appraisal of the examination has been carried out. 

 Attention is drawn, in particular, to certain materials used in the examination. The following codes are used where relevant. 

 C corrosive MH moderate hazard HH health hazard T acutely toxic F flammable O oxidising N hazardous to the aquatic environment 

 Hazard data sheets should be available from your suppliers. 

 If you have any queries regarding these Confidential Instructions, please contact Cambridge stating the Centre number, the nature of the query and the syllabus number quoted above. 

 email info@cie.org.uk phone +44 1223 553554 fax +44 1223 553558 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/51 

 Paper 5 Practical Test May/June 2018 

 CONFIDENTIAL INSTRUCTIONS Great care should be taken to ensure that any confidential information given does not reach the candidates either directly or indirectly. 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

 This document consists of 8 printed pages. 

 [Turn over 

 IB18 06_0620_51CI/3RP © UCLES 2018 

# *9277446556* 

 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 


**©UCLES 2018 0620/51/CI/M/J/18** 

**Question 1** 

Each candidate will require the following chemicals and apparatus. Labels do **not** need to include concentrations. 

 (a) 250 cm 3 of aqueous sodium thiosulfate, Na 2 S2 O 3 .5H 2 O, containing 40 g / dm 3 labelled aqueous sodium thiosulfate. The aqueous sodium thiosulfate must be freshly prepared. 

 (b) 100 cm 3 of hydrochloric acid of concentration 2.0 mol / dm^3 labelled dilute hydrochloric acid 

 (c) access to water and distilled water 

 (d) 50 cm 3 measuring cylinder 

 (e) 10 cm 3 measuring cylinder 

 (f) 250 cm 3 conical flask 

 (g) teat pipette 

 (h) stop-clock or timer which can measure to an accuracy of 1 s 

**Per five candidates** 

A bucket labelled **quenching bath** must be provided. 

The bucket must contain 1 dm^3 of approximately 5% sodium carbonate solution (made up by dissolving 50 g of Na 2 CO 3 **[MH]** or 135 g of Na 2 CO3 .10H 2 O **[MH]** in 1 dm 3 of water) and Universal Indicator. 

The Supervisor must monitor the colour of the Universal Indicator in each quenching bath to check that the solution has not become acidic. If the solution becomes acidic, the Supervisor must add more 5% sodium carbonate solution to the quenching bath. 


**© UCLES 2018 0 620/51/CI/M/J/18 [Turn over** 

**Question 2** 

Each candidate will require the following chemicals and apparatus. Labels do **not** need to include concentrations. 

 [C] (a) 12 cm 3 of dilute nitric acid of concentration 1 mol / dm 3 in a stoppered test-tube labelled solution A 

 (b) 0.3 g of basic zinc carbonate or zinc carbonate, ZnCO 3 , in a stoppered test-tube labelled solid B 

**[MH][N] (c)** aqueous ammonia of concentration 1 mol / dm 3 

 [C] (d) aqueous sodium hydroxide of concentration 1 mol / dm^3 

# [MH][N] (e) solid copper(II) oxide 

 [F] (f) 2 cm strip of magnesium ribbon 

 (g) small piece of aluminium foil, approximately 1 cm × 1 cm in size 

 [MH] (h) limewater and apparatus used to test for carbon dioxide 

 (i) distilled water 

 (j) pH indicator paper and chart 

 (k) red and blue litmus paper 

 (l) splints 

 (m) Bunsen burner and matches 

 (n) rack of test-tubes 

 (o) hard glass test-tube 

 (p) 2 × boiling tubes 

 (q) stopper to fit test-tubes 

 (r) test-tube holder 

 (s) teat pipettes 

 (t) spatula 


**©UCLES 2018 0620/51/CI/M/J/18** 

 The Supervisor’s Report is on pages 7 and 8. 


**© UCLES 2018 0 620/51/CI/M/J/18 [Turn over** 

 The Supervisor’s Report is on pages 7 and 8. 


**©UCLES 2018 0620/51/CI/M/J/18** 

 The Supervisor’s Report is on pages 7 and 8. 


**©UCLES 2018 0620/51/CI/M/J/18** 

 This form must be completed and returned in the envelope w ith the scripts. 

 Supervisor’s Report 

**1 (a)** Supervisor’s Results 

 It is recommended that the Supervisor should be a chemistry teacher. 

 The Supervisor is asked to carry out the experiments in Questions 1 and 2 and to record the results on a spare copy of the Question Paper clearly labelled ‘Supervisor’s Results’. Failure to enclose these results and this report form may lead to candidates being unavoidably penalised. 

 (b) The candidate numbers of candidates in each session were: 

 First session Second session 

 [Turn over 


**©UCLES 2018 0620/51/CI/M/J/18** 

**2** The Supervisor is invited to report details of any difficulties experienced by candidates giving names and candidate numbers. The report should include reference to: 

 (a) any general difficulties encountered in making preparations for the examination 

 (b) difficulties due to faulty apparatus or materials 

 (c) accidents to apparatus or materials. 

 Other cases of individual hardship, e.g. illness, temporary disability, should be reported directly to Cambridge on the Special Consideration form. 

**Declaration** (to be signed by the Supervisor) 

The preparation of this practical examination has been carried out so as to maintain fully the security of the examination. 

Name of Centre ...................................................................................................................................... 

Centre number ................................................... 

Signed ................................................... 

Name (in block capitals) ........................................................................... (Supervisor) 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 


