 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. IB17 06_0610_21_VI_LIL/FP© UCLES 2017 [Turn over 

# *01 

(^90) (^07) (^09) (^46) 

# * 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## BIOLOGY 0610/21 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) May/June 2017 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer SheetSoft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid.Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you.DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. There areanswers A forty , B , C questions on this paper. Answerand D. all questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet.Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2017 0610/21/M/J/17 

**1** Which characteristic do **all** living organisms show? **A** breathing **B** excretion **C** photosynthesis **D** tropism 

**2** The diagram shows some animal cells, as seen under the microscope. X 

 What will be present at X? A one cell membrane B one cell wall C two cell membranes D two cell walls 

**3** Each of the diagrams shows an area of cytoplasm. Which is from a prokaryote? **A B C D** 


© UCLES 2017 0610/21/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**4** The diagram shows a section through a root. P Q 

## R 

 What are the levels of organisation of the labelled structures? cell organ tissue A P Q R B P R Q C Q R P D R Q P 

**5** Which characteristics are correct for **both** osmosis and diffusion? 

 permeable membrane^ require a partially concentration gradientrequire a consuming processesare energy A    B    C    D    


© UCLES 2017 0610/21/M/J/17 

**6** Which diagram shows the structure of DNA? **A B C D** 

## C A 

## G T 

## T G 

## G T 

## A C 

## A C 

## A C 

## C G 

## G C 

## T A 

## G C 

## A T 

## A T 

## A T 

## C A 

## G T 

## T G 

## G T 

## A C 

## A C 

## A C 

## C G 

## G C 

## T G 

## G C 

## C T 

## A G 

## A T 

**7** The graph shows how enzyme activity is affected by temperature. 

## 0 20 40 60 

 rate of reaction 

 temperature / °C How can the change in activity between 40 °C and 55 °C be explained? A Heat has killed the enzyme. B The enzyme has been used up. C The reactants are moving faster. D The substrate is less likely to fit into the active site. 


© UCLES 2017 0610/21/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**8** Four test-tubes are set up as shown. Which test-tube contains the most carbon dioxide after one hour? **A B C D** 

 black polythene to keep out light 

 water water snail aquatic plant 

 light light light 

**9** The graph shows daily carbon dioxide uptake and transpiration by the plant _Agave americana_. The plant is adapted to live in very dry conditions. 10 8 6 4 2 0 

## 0.6 

## 0.4 

## 0.2 

## 0 4 8 12 16 20 240 

 time of day / hours 

 CO 2 uptake / mg per dm^2 per hour 

 transpiration / g H 2 O per dm^2 transpiration per hour 

 CO 2 uptake 

 What can be concluded from this graph? A More stomata are closed during dark periods. B More stomata are closed during light periods. C There is no carbon dioxide uptake during dark periods. D There is no water uptake during light periods. 

**10** In plants, which ions are used to make amino acids? **A** magnesium **B** nitrates **C** phosphates **D** potassium 


© UCLES 2017 0610/21/M/J/17 

**11** The following symptoms can be caused by a dietary deficiency: ● bone pain ● dental problems ● fragile bones ● skeletal deformities A lack of which nutrient is most likely to cause these symptoms? **A** iron **B** protein **C** vitamin C **D** vitamin D 

**12** Statements 1– 4 describe stages in the development of cholera. 1 Chloride ions are secreted in the gut. 2 Osmosis causes water to move into the gut. 3 The infected person becomes dehydrated. 4 Toxins are produced by the pathogenic bacteria. What is the correct sequence of the four stages? **A** 1 → 2 → 3 → 4 **B** 1 → 4 → 3 → 2 **C** 4 → 1 → 2 → 3 **D** 4 → 1 → 3 → 2 


© UCLES 2017 0610/21/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**13** The diagram shows a human tooth. 

 Which statement best describes the function of this tooth? A It bites into food. B It cuts food. C It grinds food. D It tears food. 

**14** The graph shows the effect of pH on the activity of three different enzymes. 

## 0 2 4 6 8 10 

 pH 

 enzyme activity 

## X Y^ Z 

 The table shows the pH of different parts of the alimentary canal. part of the alimentary canal pH mouth 7.0 stomach 2.0 small intestine 8.5 Which enzymes in the graph are likely to be protease enzymes? A X, Y and Z B X and Z only C Y and Z only D Z only 


© UCLES 2017 0610/21/M/J/17 

**15** The diagrams show cross-sections through a root and a stem. 

 V W^ 

Y (^) Z root stem Which labels are correct? V W Y Z **A** phloem xylem xylem phloem **B** phloem xylem phloem xylem **C** xylem phloem xylem phloem **D** xylem phloem phloem xylem **16** Which processes are used by root hairs to take up ions and water? ion uptake water uptake **A** active transport osmosis **B** diffusion active transport **C** osmosis diffusion **D** osmosis osmosis **17** Which of the following increases transpiration? **A** air around the leaf with high humidity **B** air molecules around the leaf with less kinetic energy **C** an absence of light falling on the leaf **D** water molecules in the leaf with more kinetic energy 


© UCLES 2017 0610/21/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**18** The diagram shows a human blood cell. 

 What is its function? A antibody production B fibrinogen production C oxygen transport D phagocytosis 

**19** What is a disease-causing organism called? **A** antibody **B** host **C** pathogen **D** phagocyte 

**20** Which is a function of the cartilage in the trachea? **A** gas exchange **B** prevents collapse of the trachea **C** produces mucus **D** traps bacteria 

**21** Which is the equation for anaerobic respiration in yeast? **A** C 6 H 12 O 6 → 2C 2 H 5 OH + 2CO 2 **B** C 6 H 12 O 6 + 6O 2 → 6CO 2 + 6H 2 O **C** 2CO 2 + 2C 2 H 5 OH → C 6 H 12 O 6 **D** 6CO 2 + 6H 2 O → C 6 H 12 O 6 + 6O 2 


© UCLES 2017 0610/21/M/J/17 

**22** A longitudinal section of the kidney and some associated structures have been labelled. Which labelling is correct? **A** cortex 

 medulla 

 ureter 

 renal artery 

## B 

 cortex 

 medulla 

 ureter 

 renal vein 

## C 

 cortex 

 medulla 

 ureter 

 renal artery 

## D 

 cortex 

 medulla 

 ureter renal artery 

**23** The steps to produce a reflex action where the hand is withdrawn from a hot object are shown. 1 Nerve impulses pass from the sensory neurone to the relay neurone. 2 Nerve impulses pass from motor neurone to the effector. 3 Nerve impulses pass from the receptor to the neurone. What is the correct sequence of steps? **A** 1 → 2 → 3 **B** 2 → 1 → 3 **C** 3 → 1 → 2 **D** 3 → 2 → 1 


© UCLES 2017 0610/21/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**24** How many different kinds of cone receptor and rod receptor are there in the human retina? 

 cone receptortypes of rod receptortypes of A 1 1 B 1 3 C 3 1 D 3 3 

**25** What is the result of the release of adrenaline? 

 blood glucoseconcentration pulse rate A decreased decreased B decreased increased C increased decreased D increased increased 

**26** Which statement about microorganisms is correct? **A** Bacteria are killed by hydrochloric acid in the duodenum. **B** Bacteria can become resistant to antibiotics. **C** Bacterial infection and viruses are treated with antibiotics. **D** Bacteria produce sugars that cause tooth decay. 

**27** Dianthus flowers can be one of three different colours: red, pink or white. A red flower is always homozygous and a white flower is always homozygous. Pink flowers areheterozygous. 

 If a red and a white flower are crossed, what percentage of the offspring will be pink? A 0% B 25% C 75% D 100% 

**28** An alligator has 32 chromosomes in each of the cells of its nose. How many chromosomes will an alligator zygote contain? **A** 16 **B** 32 **C** 46 **D** 64 


© UCLES 2017 0610/21/M/J/17 

**29** Which hormone is produced by cells in the placenta of a developing fetus? **A** FSH **B** LH **C** testosterone **D** progesterone 

**30** The diagram shows four types of birth control device. Which is **not** a barrier method of contraception? **A B C D** 

**31** Which blood component is destroyed in people who are HIV positive? **A** lymphocytes **B** phagocytes **C** platelets **D** red blood cells 

**32** What are stem cells? **A** specialised cells that divide by meiosis to produce daughter cells **B** specialised cells that divide by mitosis to produce daughter cells **C** unspecialised cells that divide by meiosis to produce daughter cells **D** unspecialised cells that divide by mitosis to produce daughter cells 


© UCLES 2017 0610/21/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**33** The list shows the diploid number of chromosomes of four organisms. fruit fly 8 human 46 potato 48 garden pea 14 What is the correct chromosome number of a male sex cell in each of these organisms? fruit fly human potato garden pea **A** 4 23 24 7 **B** 4 46 12 7 **C** 8 46 48 14 **D** 16 92 96 28 

**34** Which of these is a population? 1 all the insects in a rainforest 2 all the tigers in a rainforest 3 all the kapok trees in a rainforest **A** 1, 2 and 3 **B** 1 only **C** 1 and 2 only **D** 2 and 3 only 

**35** The number of bacteria resistant to antibiotics is increasing. What has contributed to this situation? **A** choosing the antibiotic carefully to match the strain of bacterium **B** not completing the course of prescribed antibiotics **C** tracing, testing and treating people who have been in contact with the infected person **D** using antibiotics only when essential 


© UCLES 2017 0610/21/M/J/17 

**36** The processes listed in 1– 4 will affect the concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. 1 increased deforestation 2 increased forestation 3 decreased fossil fuel combustion 4 increased fossil fuel combustion Which processes would increase the concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere? **A** 1 and 3 **B** 1 and 4 **C** 2 and 3 **D** 2 and 4 

**37** The graph shows the changes in the populations of predator and prey over a period of time. Which point on the graph shows a decrease in predator population? 

 number of individuals 

 time 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 

**38** Which is a reason for using bacteria in biotechnology? **A** Bacteria are found inside the human body. **B** Bacteria can become resistant to antibiotics. **C** Bacteria can make complex molecules. **D** Bacteria reproduce slowly. 

**39** Why is yeast used in breadmaking? **A** to produce alcohol **B** to produce carbon dioxide **C** to use up oxygen **D** to use up sugar 


© UCLES 2017 0610/21/M/J/17 

**40** The graph shows the levels of dissolved oxygen and mineral ions in a river. At which point does raw sewage enter the river? 

 distance along river 

 levels 

## A B C D 

 mineral ions 

 dissolved oxygen 

 direction of river flow 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeInternational Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge LocalExaminations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2017 0610/21/M/J/17 

## BLANK PAGE 


