 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 16 printed pages. 

 IB17 06_0610_13/3RP © UCLES 2017 [Turn over 

# *3088341698* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## BIOLOGY 0610/13 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) May/June 2017 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2017 0610/13/M/J/17 

**1** Which characteristic do **all** living organisms show? 

 A breathing 

 B excretion 

 C photosynthesis 

 D tropism 

**2** The diagram shows some animal cells, as seen under the microscope. 

 X 

 What will be present at X? 

 A one cell membrane 

 B one cell wall 

 C two cell membranes 

 D two cell walls 


© UCLES 2017 0610/13/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**3** The diagram shows an animal. 

 Use the key to identify the animal in the diagram. 

 1 has six jointed legs .......................................... go to 2 

 has eight jointed legs ....................................... go to 3 

 2 has antennae longer than its body .................. B Gryllus 

 has antennae shorter than its body ................. C Musca 

 3 has stripes on its legs ...................................... A Araneus 

 has no stripes on its legs ................................. D Pisaurina 


© UCLES 2017 0610/13/M/J/17 

**4** The diagram shows a section through a root. 

 P Q 

## R 

 What are the levels of organisation of the labelled structures? 

 cell organ tissue 

 A P Q R 

 B P R Q 

 C Q R P 

 D R Q P 

**5** Which characteristics are correct for **both** osmosis and diffusion? 

 require a partially permeable membrane 

 require a concentration gradient 

 are energy consuming processes 

 A    

 B    

 C    

 D    


© UCLES 2017 0610/13/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**6** What is the correct test for protein? 

 name of test heat colour change 

 A Benedict’s yes blue to red 

 B biuret yes remains blue 

 C biuret no blue to purple D emulsion no appearance of a white emulsion 

**7** The diagram represents an enzyme-controlled reaction. 

 What represents the enzyme? 

## A D 

## C 

## B 

**8** Four test-tubes are set up as shown. 

 Which test-tube contains the most carbon dioxide after one hour? 

 A B C D 

 black polythene to keep out light 

 water 

 water snail 

 aquatic plant 

 light light light 


© UCLES 2017 0610/13/M/J/17 

**9** The diagrams show the structure of four different cells from the leaf of a dicotyledonous plant. 

 Which cell is a guard cell? 

 A B 

## C D 

## NOT TO 

## SCALE 

**10** Which mineral ion is absorbed by plant roots and used in the production of all amino acids? 

 A carbonate 

 B hydroxide 

 C magnesium 

 D nitrate 

**11** What is the pathway taken by water as it travels through a plant? 

 A mesophyll cells → xylem → root cortex cells → root hair cells 

 B root cortex cells → root hair cells → mesophyll cells → xylem 

 C root hair cells → root cortex cells → xylem → mesophyll cells 

 D xylem cells → mesophyll → root cortex cells → root hair cells 


© UCLES 2017 0610/13/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**12** Which is the main source of fibre in a human diet? 

 A dairy products 

 B meat products 

 C plant material 

 D water 

**13** The diagram shows a person’s teeth. Some of their teeth are missing. 

 What would the person find difficult? 

 A biting apples 

 B drinking water 

 C grinding meat 

 D tearing dry bread 

**14** What are functions of the hydrochloric acid in gastric juice? 

 giving the optimum pH for gastric enzymes killing bacteria 

 A   

 B   

 C   

 D   


© UCLES 2017 0610/13/M/J/17 

**15** The diagrams show transverse sections through a root and a leaf. 

 root leaf 

## V W^ 

## Y 

## Z 

 Which correctly identifies the phloem? 

 A V and Y B V and Z C W and Y D W and Z 

# 16 A piece of blue cobalt(II) chloride paper is clipped to the lower surface of a fresh leaf and is then 

 covered with plastic, as shown. 

 After a few minutes, part of the paper turns pink, showing that water is present. 

 paper remains blue 

 paper turns lower surface pink of leaf 

# cobalt(II) chloride paper 

 plastic cover 

 Which process carried out by leaves causes the paper to turn pink? 

 A absorption 

 B photosynthesis 

 C respiration 

 D transpiration 


© UCLES 2017 0610/13/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**17** The diagram shows the outside of a human heart. 

 Which is a coronary artery? 

 right atrium 

 left ventricle 

 left atrium 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 

**18** Which of the blood vessels transporting these substances is an artery? 

 A carbon dioxide from the body to the heart 

 B carbon dioxide from the heart to the lungs 

 C oxygen from the lungs to the left atrium 

 D urea from the kidney to the vena cava 

**19** Which body defence is a chemical barrier? 

 A antibody production 

 B hairs in the nose 

 C mucus lining the airways 

 D skin 


© UCLES 2017 0610/13/M/J/17 

**20** The diagram shows part of the human gas exchange system. 

 Where does the exchange of gases between air and blood take place? 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 

**21** Which equation represents anaerobic respiration in humans? 

 A glucose → lactic acid 

 B glucose → lactic acid + carbon dioxide 

 C glucose + oxygen → lactic acid 

 D glucose + oxygen → lactic acid + carbon dioxide 

**22** The diagram shows some organs in the human body. 

 In which part are amino acids broken down to form urea? 

## D 

## C 

## A 

## B 


© UCLES 2017 0610/13/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**23** Which is the light sensitive part of the eye? 

 A cornea 

 B iris 

 C lens 

 D retina 

**24** Which response occurs when body temperature rises? 

 A contraction of hair erector muscles 

 B increased production of urine 

 C increased shivering 

 D increased sweating 

**25** What is meant by the term _phototropism_? 

 A absorbing mineral ions using light energy 

 B directional growth in response to gravity 

 C directional growth in response to light 

 D making food using light energy 

**26** Which row shows the effects of excessive alcohol consumption? 

 reaction time self-control 

 anti-social behaviour 

 A quicker increased increased 

 B quicker reduced increased 

 C slower increased decreased 

 D slower reduced increased 

**27** Which statement applies to sexual reproduction? 

 A Offspring are genetically identical to the parent. 

 B Offspring are not produced from gametes. 

 C Offspring develop from a zygote. 

 D Offspring develop from one gamete. 


© UCLES 2017 0610/13/M/J/17 

**28** The diagram shows half a flower. 

 Which structure is the stigma? 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 

**29** The diagram shows the human female reproductive system. 

## X 

 What is structure X? 

 A ovary 

 B oviduct 

 C uterus 

 D vagina 

**30** Which is a barrier method of birth control? 

 A abstinence from sex 

 B monitoring body temperature 

 C monitoring cervical mucus 

 D using a femidom 


© UCLES 2017 0610/13/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**31** What do genes code for? 

 A fats 

 B proteins 

 C starch 

 D sugars 

**32** What are the uses of meiosis and mitosis? 

 asexual reproduction growth^ 

 sexual reproduction 

 A meiosis meiosis meiosis 

 B meiosis meiosis mitosis 

 C mitosis meiosis meiosis 

 D mitosis mitosis meiosis 

**33** The graph shows the masses of two different types of tomato. 

## 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240 

 number of tomatoes 

 mass / g 

 type 1 type 2 

 What can be concluded from the graph? 

 A Genes do not affect the mass of tomatoes. 

 B Type 1 tomatoes show continuous variation. 

 C Type 2 tomatoes are sometimes smaller than type 1 tomatoes. 

 D Type 2 tomatoes show discontinuous variation. 


© UCLES 2017 0610/13/M/J/17 

**34** Large areas of forest are cut down in order to clear the land for other uses. 

 Which effect does this have on the atmosphere? 

 A Carbon dioxide decreases. 

 B Carbon dioxide increases. 

 C Oxygen increases. 

 D Water vapour increases. 

**35** The diagram shows part of a food web in a pile of dead leaves. 

 dead leaves 

 bacteria millipedes 

 centipedes 

 mites fungi 

 Which terms describe the organisms in the table? 

 bacteria centipedes leaves 

 A consumers herbivores producers 

 B decomposers carnivores decomposers 

 C decomposers consumers producers 

 D producers carnivores producers 


© UCLES 2017 0610/13/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**36** The diagram shows part of the water cycle. 

 clouds 

 air 

 plants water in soil 

 rivers and lakes 

## S 

## T 

 What are processes S and T? 

## S T 

 A condensation drainage 

 B condensation evaporation 

 C evaporation precipitation 

 D evaporation transpiration 

**37** The graph shows the changes in the populations of predator and prey over a period of time. 

 Which point on the graph shows a decrease in predator population? 

 number of individuals 

 time 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2017 0610/13/M/J/17 

**38** Which is an example of genetic engineering? 

 A altering the DNA in crop plants so they are resistant to herbicides 

 B only breeding from crop plants that are resistant to insect pests 

 C production of insulin in the pancreas 

 D using yeast to produce ethanol for biofuels 

**39** Why is yeast used in breadmaking? 

 A to produce alcohol 

 B to produce carbon dioxide 

 C to use up oxygen 

 D to use up sugar 

**40** The graph shows the levels of dissolved oxygen and mineral ions in a river. 

 At which point does raw sewage enter the river? 

 distance along river 

 levels 

## A B C D 

 mineral ions 

 dissolved oxygen 

 direction of river flow 


