 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 16 printed pages. 

 IB17 06_0610_23/2RP © UCLES 2017 [Turn over 

# *3291229666* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## BIOLOGY 0610/23 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) May/June 2017 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A, B, C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2017 0610/23/M/J/17 

1 Which characteristic do all living organisms show? 

 A breathing 

 B excretion 

 C photosynthesis 

 D tropism 

2 The diagram shows some animal cells, as seen under the microscope. 

 X 

 What will be present at X? 

 A one cell membrane 

 B one cell wall 

 C two cell membranes 

 D two cell walls 

3 Which structures are present in large numbers in cells with high rates of metabolism? 

 A chromosomes 

 B mitochondria 

 C ribosomes 

 D vacuoles 


© UCLES 2017 0610/23/M/J/17 [Turn over 

4 The diagram shows a section through a root. 

 P 

 Q 

## R 

 What are the levels of organisation of the labelled structures? 

 cell organ tissue 

 A P Q R 

 B P R Q 

 C Q R P 

 D R Q P 

5 Which characteristics are correct for both osmosis and diffusion? 

 require a partially permeable membrane 

 require a concentration gradient 

 are energy consuming processes 

 A ✓ ✓  

 B ✓  ✓ 

 C  ✓  

 D   ✓ 


© UCLES 2017 0610/23/M/J/17 

6 The bases on one of the strands of a DNA molecule have the sequence shown. 

 A-A-T-C-T-G 

 What is the corresponding sequence of bases on the other strand? 

 A A-A-T-C-T-G 

 B C-C-G-A-G-T 

 C G-G-C-T-C-A 

 D T-T-A-G-A-C 

7 Which statement describes the effect of temperature on enzymes? 

 A High temperatures denature enzymes making it difficult for substrate molecules to fit into the active site. 

 B High temperatures denature enzymes making it easy for substrate molecules to fit into the active site. 

 C Low temperatures denature enzymes making it difficult for substrate molecules to fit into the active site. 

 D Low temperatures denature enzymes making it easy for substrate molecules to fit into the active site. 

8 Four test-tubes are set up as shown. 

 Which test-tube contains the most carbon dioxide after one hour? 

 A B C D 

 black polythene to keep out light 

 water 

 water snail 

 aquatic plant 

 light light light 


© UCLES 2017 0610/23/M/J/17 [Turn over 

9 The diagrams show the structure of four different cells from the leaf of a dicotyledonous plant. 

 Which cell is a guard cell? 

 A B 

## C D 

## NOT TO 

## SCALE 

10 Which mineral ion is absorbed by plant roots and used in the production of all amino acids? 

 A carbonate 

 B hydroxide 

 C magnesium 

 D nitrate 

11 Which is the equation for photosynthesis? 

 A C 6 H 12 O 6 → 2C 2 H 5 OH + 2CO 2 

 B C 6 H 12 O 6 + 6O 2 → 6CO 2 + H 2 O 

 C 2C 2 H 5 OH + 2CO 2 → C 6 H 12 O 6 

 D 6CO 2 + 6H 2 O → C 6 H 12 O 6 + 6O 2 


© UCLES 2017 0610/23/M/J/17 

12 Statements 1– 4 describe stages in the development of cholera. 

 1 Chloride ions are secreted in the gut. 

 2 Osmosis causes water to move into the gut. 

 3 The infected person becomes dehydrated. 

 4 Toxins are produced by the pathogenic bacteria. 

 What is the correct sequence of the four stages? 

 A 1 → 2 → 3 → 4 

 B 1 → 4 → 3 → 2 

 C 4 → 1 → 2 → 3 

 D 4 → 1 → 3 → 2 

13 The diagram shows a person’s teeth. Some of their teeth are missing. 

 What would the person find difficult? 

 A biting apples 

 B drinking water 

 C grinding meat 

 D tearing dry bread 


© UCLES 2017 0610/23/M/J/17 [Turn over 

14 The graph shows the effect of pH on the activity of three different enzymes. 

## 0 2 4 6 8 10 

 pH 

 enzyme activity 

## X Y^ 

## Z 

 The table shows the pH of different parts of the alimentary canal. 

 part of the alimentary canal 

 pH 

 mouth 7.0 

 stomach 2.0 

 small intestine 8.5 

 Which enzymes in the graph are likely to be protease enzymes? 

 A X, Y and Z B X and Z only C Y and Z only D Z only 


© UCLES 2017 0610/23/M/J/17 

15 The diagram shows a villus. Structures P and Q absorb different products of digestion. 

## P 

## Q 

 Which row identifies the products absorbed by P and Q? 

## P Q 

 A amino acids glucose 

 B fatty acids maltose 

 C glucose fatty acids 

 D maltose amino acids 

16 The diagram shows a leaf attached to the stem of a plant. 

 sunlight 

## X 

## X 

 What do the arrows at X represent? 

 A movement of amino acids in phloem 

 B movement of carbon dioxide in phloem 

 C movement of mineral ions in xylem 

 D movement of sucrose in xylem 


© UCLES 2017 0610/23/M/J/17 [Turn over 

17 Which row shows what is carried, and in which direction, by the pulmonary vein? 

 what is carried direction 

 A deoxygenated blood from the heart 

 B deoxygenated blood to the heart 

 C oxygenated blood from the heart 

 D oxygenated blood to the heart 

18 Which component of the blood produces antibodies? 

 A lymphocytes 

 B phagocytes 

 C plasma 

 D red blood cells 

19 Which statement about antibodies is correct? 

 A Breast milk contains antibodies and protects babies by giving them active immunity. 

 B Injections of antibodies give passive immunity against the disease scurvy. 

 C Insect repellents contain antibodies and give mosquitoes passive immunity against malaria. 

 D Injections of antibodies give passive immunity against some pathogens. 

20 Which row shows the correct combination of muscle contractions and the pressure in the thorax when breathing out? 

 internal intercostal muscles 

 external intercostal muscles 

 diaphragm pressurein thorax 

 A contracted contracted contracted high 

 B contracted relaxed relaxed high 

 C relaxed contracted contracted high 

 D relaxed relaxed relaxed low 


© UCLES 2017 0610/23/M/J/17 

21 Which is not involved in removing the oxygen debt after a human has been exercising? 

 A aerobic respiration of alcohol in the liver 

 B aerobic respiration of lactic acid in the liver 

 C continuation of deeper breathing 

 D continuation of faster heart rate 

22 A longitudinal section of the kidney and some associated structures have been labelled. 

 Which labelling is correct? 

 A 

 cortex 

 medulla 

 ureter 

 renal artery 

## B 

 cortex 

 medulla 

 ureter 

 renal vein 

## C 

 cortex 

 medulla 

 ureter 

 renal artery 

## D 

 cortex 

 medulla 

 ureter 

 renal artery 


© UCLES 2017 0610/23/M/J/17 [Turn over 

23 The diagram shows a synapse. 

## X 

 What do the dots at X represent? 

 A neurotransmitter 

 B receptor molecule 

 C synaptic cleft 

 D vesicle 

24 Which is the light sensitive part of the eye? 

 A cornea 

 B iris 

 C lens 

 D retina 

25 What is meant by the term phototropism? 

 A absorbing mineral ions using light energy 

 B directional growth in response to gravity 

 C directional growth in response to light 

 D making food using light energy 

26 Which row shows the effects of excessive alcohol consumption? 

 reaction time self-control anti-socialbehaviour 

 A quicker increased increased 

 B quicker reduced increased 

 C slower increased decreased 

 D slower reduced increased 


© UCLES 2017 0610/23/M/J/17 

27 Dianthus flowers can be one of three different colours: red, pink or white. 

 A red flower is always homozygous and a white flower is always homozygous. Pink flowers are heterozygous. 

 If a red and a white flower are crossed, what percentage of the offspring will be pink? 

 A 0% B 25% C 75% D 100% 

28 The diagram shows the ovary of a flower. 

 pollen grain 

 ovary 

 Which process is shown in the diagram? 

 A cross-pollination 

 B fertilisation 

 C meiosis 

 D self-pollination 

29 What is a function of the placenta? 

 A a barrier to nicotine 

 B a barrier to the rubella virus 

 C exchange of blood 

 D transfer of dissolved nutrients 


© UCLES 2017 0610/23/M/J/17 [Turn over 

30 Some men do not produce healthy sperm cells. A couple may choose to use the sperm of another man, a donor, in order for the woman to get pregnant. 

 Which procedure involves inserting sperm into the vagina of a woman from a donor? 

 A artificial insemination (AI) 

 B birth control 

 C in vitro fertilisation (IVF) 

 D vasectomy 

31 Which blood component is destroyed in people who are HIV positive? 

 A lymphocytes 

 B phagocytes 

 C platelets 

 D red blood cells 

32 Four of the processes involved in the production of a protein are shown. 

 1 mRNA attaches to a ribosome. 

 2 mRNA moves to the cytoplasm. 

 3 The ribosome assembles amino acids into a protein molecule. 

 4 An mRNA copy of the gene is made. 

 In which sequence do these events normally occur? 

 A 1 → 2 → 3 → 4 

 B 2 → 1 → 3 → 4 

 C 4 → 2 → 1 → 3 

 D 4 → 3 → 2 → 1 

33 Which statement about the sex chromosomes is correct? 

 A Men and women can inherit characteristics from genes carried on the X chromosome. 

 B Men and women can inherit characteristics from genes carried on the Y chromosome. 

 C Only men can inherit characteristics from genes carried on the X chromosome. 

 D Only women can inherit characteristics from genes carried on the Y chromosome. 


© UCLES 2017 0610/23/M/J/17 

34 Which row best describes human blood groups? 

 affected by environment 

 has no intermediate phenotypes 

 shows continuous variation 

 shows discontinuous variation 

 A ✓  ✓  

 B ✓   ✓ 

 C  ✓ ✓  

 D  ✓  ✓ 

35 The diagram represents part of an aquatic food web. 

 aquatic plants 

 tadpoles water beetles 

 frogs 

 fish small shrimps 

 Which organisms are primary consumers in this food web? 

 A small shrimps and tadpoles 

 B tadpoles and frogs 

 C water beetles and fish 

 D water beetles and frogs 


© UCLES 2017 0610/23/M/J/17 [Turn over 

36 The diagram shows part of the water cycle. 

 clouds 

 air 

 plants water in soil 

 rivers and lakes 

## S 

## T 

 What are processes S and T? 

## S T 

 A condensation drainage 

 B condensation evaporation 

 C evaporation precipitation 

 D evaporation transpiration 

37 The graph shows the changes in the populations of predator and prey over a period of time. 

 Which point on the graph shows a decrease in predator population? 

 number of individuals 

 time 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2017 0610/23/M/J/17 

38 Which is an example of genetic engineering? 

 A altering the DNA in crop plants so they are resistant to herbicides 

 B only breeding from crop plants that are resistant to insect pests 

 C production of insulin in the pancreas 

 D using yeast to produce ethanol for biofuels 

39 Why is yeast used in breadmaking? 

 A to produce alcohol 

 B to produce carbon dioxide 

 C to use up oxygen 

 D to use up sugar 

40 The graph shows the levels of dissolved oxygen and mineral ions in a river. 

 At which point does raw sewage enter the river? 

 distance along river 

 levels 

## A B C D 

 mineral ions 

 dissolved oxygen 

 direction of river flow 


