 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. 

 IB17 06_0610_11/2RP © UCLES 2017 [Turn over 

# *6354409362* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## BIOLOGY 0610/11 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) May/June 2017 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A, B, C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2017 0610/11/M/J/17 

1 Which characteristic do all living organisms show? 

 A breathing 

 B excretion 

 C photosynthesis 

 D tropism 

2 The diagram shows some animal cells, as seen under the microscope. 

 X 

 What will be present at X? 

 A one cell membrane 

 B one cell wall 

 C two cell membranes 

 D two cell walls 

3 The diagram shows an animal. 

 What is the animal? 

 1 animal with a vertebral column ....................................... vertebrate 

 animal with an exoskeleton ............................................ go to 2 

 2 no distinct head, thorax and abdomen ........................... A 

 distinct head, thorax and abdomen ................................ go to 3 

 3 eye occupies less than one third of the head ................. B 

 eye occupies more than one third of the head ................ go to 4 

 4 wings are wider than they are long ................................. C 

 wings are longer than they are wide ............................... D 


© UCLES 2017 0610/11/M/J/17 [Turn over 

4 The diagram shows a section through a root. 

 P 

 Q 

## R 

 What are the levels of organisation of the labelled structures? 

 cell organ tissue 

 A P Q R 

 B P R Q 

 C Q R P 

 D R Q P 

5 Which characteristics are correct for both osmosis and diffusion? 

 require a partially permeable membrane 

 require a concentration gradient 

 are energy consuming processes 

 A ✓ ✓  

 B ✓  ✓ 

 C  ✓  

 D   ✓ 


© UCLES 2017 0610/11/M/J/17 

6 The table shows the results of some food tests. 

 Which row shows a food containing both protein and starch? 

 Benedict’s solution biuret test^ ethanol^ 

 iodine solution 

 A blue blue clear blue-black 

 B blue purple clear blue-black 

 C red blue cloudy brown 

 D red purple cloudy brown 

7 The diagrams show an experiment on enzyme activity. 

 The test-tubes contain hydrogen peroxide and the enzyme catalase. 

 In which test-tube is the enzyme inactive? 

 A 

 at 4 °C 

## B 

 at 37 °C 

## C 

 at 37 °C 

## D 

 at 37 °C 

 mixture of catalase and hydrogen peroxide 

 mixture of boiled catalase and hydrogen peroxide 

 mixture of catalase and boiled hydrogen peroxide 

8 Four test-tubes are set up as shown. 

 Which test-tube contains the most carbon dioxide after one hour? 

 A B C D 

 black polythene to keep out light 

 water 

 water snail 

 aquatic plant 

 light light light 


© UCLES 2017 0610/11/M/J/17 [Turn over 

9 The diagram shows a cross-section through a leaf. 

## X 

 Which tissue is the cell labelled X part of? 

 A epidermis 

 B palisade mesophyll 

 C phloem 

 D spongy mesophyll 

10 In plants, which ions are used to make amino acids? 

 A magnesium 

 B nitrates 

 C phosphates 

 D potassium 

11 Which condition can be caused by a deficiency of vitamin C? 

 A constipation 

 B cholera 

 C obesity 

 D scurvy 

12 In which structure does storage and assimilation occur? 

 A liver 

 B mouth 

 C pancreas 

 D rectum 


© UCLES 2017 0610/11/M/J/17 

13 The diagram shows a human tooth. 

 Which statement best describes the function of this tooth? 

 A It bites into food. 

 B It cuts food. 

 C It grinds food. 

 D It tears food. 

14 To protect some medicines from the effect of gastric juice some tablets are coated with a starch-like substance. 

 Which enzyme digests the coating and what is produced by this action? 

 enzyme products 

 A amylase fatty acids and glycerol 

 B amylase simple sugars 

 C lipase fatty acids and glycerol 

 D lipase simple sugars 


© UCLES 2017 0610/11/M/J/17 [Turn over 

15 The diagrams show cross-sections through a root and a stem. 

## V W^ 

## Y 

## Z 

 root stem 

 Which labels are correct? 

## V W Y Z 

 A phloem xylem xylem phloem 

 B phloem xylem phloem xylem 

 C xylem phloem xylem phloem 

 D xylem phloem phloem xylem 

# 16 A piece of blue cobalt(II) chloride paper is clipped to the lower surface of a fresh leaf and is then 

 covered with plastic, as shown. 

 After a few minutes, part of the paper turns pink, showing that water is present. 

 paper remains blue 

 paper turns lower surface pink of leaf 

# cobalt(II) chloride paper 

 plastic cover 

 Which process carried out by leaves causes the paper to turn pink? 

 A absorption 

 B photosynthesis 

 C respiration 

 D transpiration 


© UCLES 2017 0610/11/M/J/17 

17 The diagram shows a section through the mammalian heart. 

## 1 

## 2 

## 3 

## 4 

 Which labelled structures are arteries? 

 A 1 and 2 B 1 and 4 C 2 and 3 D 3 and 4 

18 What is an example of a transmissible disease? 

 A COPD 

 B HIV 

 C scurvy 

 D tooth decay 

19 What is a disease-causing organism called? 

 A antibody 

 B host 

 C pathogen 

 D phagocyte 


© UCLES 2017 0610/11/M/J/17 [Turn over 

20 The diagram shows part of the human gas exchange system. 

 Where does the exchange of gases between air and blood take place? 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 

21 Which statements about aerobic respiration are correct? 

 breaks down nutrients 

 releases energy 

 uses oxygen 

 A ✓ ✓ ✓ 

 B ✓ ✓  

 C   ✓ 

 D    

22 The diagram shows some organs in the human body. 

 In which part are amino acids broken down to form urea? 

## D 

## C 

## A 

## B 


© UCLES 2017 0610/11/M/J/17 

23 What is a synapse? 

 A a junction between two neurones 

 B a relay neurone 

 C an effector 

 D an electrical signal 

24 The diagram shows the skin. 

 Which labelled structure releases sweat? 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 

25 The diagram shows a plant shoot growing towards light. 

 light 

 Which response is shown by the shoot of the plant? 

 A active transport 

 B gravitropism 

 C photosynthesis 

 D phototropism 


© UCLES 2017 0610/11/M/J/17 [Turn over 

26 Which statement about microorganisms is correct? 

 A Bacteria are killed by hydrochloric acid in the duodenum. 

 B Bacteria can become resistant to antibiotics. 

 C Bacterial infection and viruses are treated with antibiotics. 

 D Bacteria produce sugars that cause tooth decay. 

27 Which row correctly describes the type of plant reproduction that involves pollination? 

 type of plant reproduction 

 offspring compared with parents 

 A asexual genetically different 

 B asexual genetically identical 

 C sexual genetically different 

 D sexual genetically identical 

28 The diagram shows half a flower. 

 Which structure is the stigma? 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 

29 A typical menstrual cycle consists of 28 days, with day 1 being the start of menstruation. 

 On which day is the lining of the uterus thickest? 

 A 1 B 4 C 9 D 21 


© UCLES 2017 0610/11/M/J/17 

30 The diagram shows four types of birth control device. 

 Which is not a barrier method of contraception? 

 A B C D 

31 The diagram shows the production of a human fertilised egg cell which develops into a male. 

 sperm cell 

 egg cell 

 fertilised egg cell 

 Which row shows the sex chromosomes in the cells? 

 sex chromosomes found in 

 egg cell sperm cell fertilised egg cell 

 A X X XX 

 B Y X XY 

 C X Y XY 

 D X Y XX 

32 Which statements about mitosis are correct? 

 1 Mitosis produces genetically identical cells. 

 2 Mitosis produces genetically different cells. 

 3 Mitosis produces gametes. 

 4 Mitosis produces body cells. 

 A 1 and 3 B 1 and 4 C 3 and 4 D 2 and 3 


© UCLES 2017 0610/11/M/J/17 [Turn over 

33 The graph shows the masses of two different types of tomato. 

## 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240 

 number of tomatoes 

 mass / g 

 type 1 type 2 

 What can be concluded from the graph? 

 A Genes do not affect the mass of tomatoes. 

 B Type 1 tomatoes show continuous variation. 

 C Type 2 tomatoes are sometimes smaller than type 1 tomatoes. 

 D Type 2 tomatoes show discontinuous variation. 

34 Which of these is a population? 

 1 all the insects in a rainforest 

 2 all the tigers in a rainforest 

 3 all the kapok trees in a rainforest 

 A 1, 2 and 3 B 1 only C 1 and 2 only D 2 and 3 only 

35 The diagram shows a food chain in a rock pool. 

 seaweed → whelks → crabs → seagulls 

 What will happen if the number of secondary consumers increases? 

 There will be 

 A fewer crabs. 

 B fewer seagulls. 

 C fewer whelks. 

 D less seaweed. 


© UCLES 2017 0610/11/M/J/17 

36 The diagram shows part of the carbon cycle. 

 consumers 

 decomposers producers 

 1 carbon dioxide 2 3 4 

 In which labelled stages is respiration occurring? 

## 1 2 3 4 

## A ✓ ✓ ✓  

## B ✓  ✓ ✓ 

## C  ✓ ✓ ✓ 

## D    ✓ 

37 The graph shows the changes in the populations of predator and prey over a period of time. 

 Which point on the graph shows a decrease in predator population? 

 number of individuals 

 time 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 

38 Which is a reason for using bacteria in biotechnology? 

 A Bacteria are found inside the human body. 

 B Bacteria can become resistant to antibiotics. 

 C Bacteria can make complex molecules. 

 D Bacteria reproduce slowly. 


© UCLES 2017 0610/11/M/J/17 

39 Why is yeast used in breadmaking? 

 A to produce alcohol 

 B to produce carbon dioxide 

 C to use up oxygen 

 D to use up sugar 

40 The graph shows the levels of dissolved oxygen and mineral ions in a river. 

 At which point does raw sewage enter the river? 

 distance along river 

 levels 

## A B C D 

 mineral ions 

 dissolved oxygen 

 direction of river flow 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2017 0610/11/M/J/17 

## BLANK PAGE 


