 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. 

 IB17 06_0610_22/3RP © UCLES 2027 [Turn over 

# *0369736826* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## BIOLOGY 0610/22 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) May/June 2017 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2017 0610/22/M/J/17 

**1** Which characteristic do **all** living organisms show? 

 A breathing 

 B excretion 

 C photosynthesis 

 D tropism 

**2** The diagram shows some animal cells, as seen under the microscope. 

 X 

 What will be present at X? 

 A one cell membrane 

 B one cell wall 

 C two cell membranes 

 D two cell walls 

**3** A plant has leaves that have white areas and green areas. 

 white area green area 

 Which cell structures are not present in the white areas? 

 A cell membranes 

 B cell walls 

 C chloroplasts 

 D vacuoles 


© UCLES 2017 0610/22/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**4** The diagram shows a section through a root. 

 P Q 

## R 

 What are the levels of organisation of the labelled structures? 

 cell organ tissue 

 A P Q R 

 B P R Q 

 C Q R P 

 D R Q P 

**5** Which characteristics are correct for **both** osmosis and diffusion? 

 require a partially permeable membrane 

 require a concentration gradient 

 are energy consuming processes 

 A    

 B    

 C    

 D    

**6** Which is an example of active transport? 

 A carbon dioxide entering a leaf 

 B ion uptake by root hair cells 

 C oxygen moving from the alveoli into the blood 

 D water uptake by root hair cells 


© UCLES 2017 0610/22/M/J/17 

**7** An experiment was carried out to study the effect of temperature on the time taken for protein to be digested by an enzyme. 

 The table shows the results. 

 temperature / °C observation 

 25 4 hours for complete digestion 

 35 2 hours for complete digestion 

 45 3 hours for complete digestion 

 55 no digestion takes place 

 For these results, at which temperature does the enzyme denature? 

 A 20 °C B 30 °C C 40 °C D 50 °C 

**8** Four test-tubes are set up as shown. 

 Which test-tube contains the most carbon dioxide after one hour? 

 A B C D 

 black polythene to keep out light 

 water 

 water snail 

 aquatic plant 

 light light light 


© UCLES 2017 0610/22/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**9** The diagram shows a cross-section through a leaf. 

## X 

 What is the cell labelled X? 

 A epidermis 

 B guard cell 

 C palisade mesophyll 

 D spongy mesophyll 

**10** The nutrient ions present in four different soils are shown. 

 Which soil would be best for growing healthy, green plants? 

 nitrate ions magnesium ions 

 A absent absent 

 B absent present 

 C present absent 

 D present present 

**11** Which disease is caused by a deficiency of iron in the diet? 

 A anaemia 

 B kwashiorkor 

 C marasmus 

 D rickets 


© UCLES 2017 0610/22/M/J/17 

**12** Statements 1– 4 describe stages in the development of cholera. 

 1 Chloride ions are secreted in the gut. 

 2 Osmosis causes water to move into the gut. 

 3 The infected person becomes dehydrated. 

 4 Toxins are produced by the pathogenic bacteria. 

 What is the correct sequence of the four stages? 

 A 1 → 2 → 3 → 4 

 B 1 → 4 → 3 → 2 

 C 4 → 1 → 2 → 3 

 D 4 → 1 → 3 → 2 

**13** Which type of tooth does the diagram show? 

 A canine 

 B incisor 

 C molar 

 D premolar 


© UCLES 2017 0610/22/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**14** The graph shows the effect of pH on the activity of three different enzymes. 

## 0 2 4 6 8 10 

 pH 

 enzyme activity 

## X Y^ 

## Z 

 The table shows the pH of different parts of the alimentary canal. 

 part of the alimentary canal pH 

 mouth 7.0 

 stomach 2.0 

 small intestine 8.5 

 Which enzymes in the graph are likely to be protease enzymes? 

 A X, Y and Z B X and Z only C Y and Z only D Z only 

**15** Which statement describes assimilation? 

 A the breakdown of large, insoluble molecules into small soluble molecules 

 B the movement of small soluble molecules through the wall of the intestine into the blood 

 C the movement of small soluble molecules into the cells of the body, where they are used, becoming part of the cells 

 D the taking of substances into the body through the mouth 


© UCLES 2017 0610/22/M/J/17 

**16** The diagram shows a cross-section of a plant stem. 

 V 

 What is the function of the tissue labelled V? 

 A transporting dissolved nutrients and mineral ions 

 B transporting dissolved nutrients only 

 C transporting water and mineral ions 

 D transporting water only 

**17** Which process occurs during transpiration? 

 A evaporation of water from the xylem 

 B loss of water by osmosis from the guard cells 

 C movement of water vapour through the spongy mesophyll by active transport 

 D movement of water vapour through the stomata by diffusion 


© UCLES 2017 0610/22/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**18** The diagrams show an experiment on transpiration. 

 Four leaves of the same species are balanced on two drinking straws. One or both sides of the leaves are covered in grease. Any difference in mass causes the heavier end to be lower. 

 leaf 1 no covering 

 leaf 2 both surfaces covered 

 leaf 3 upper surface covered 

 leaf 4 lower surface covered 

 thread 

 drinking straw 

 paper clip 

 At the start of the experiment the straws were positioned so that the leaves were level. 

 Which leaves will be lower after an hour? 

 A 1 and 3 B 1 and 4 C 2 and 3 D 2 and 4 

**19** Which chamber of the heart has the most muscular wall? 

 A left atrium 

 B left ventricle 

 C right atrium 

 D right ventricle 

**20** A deficiency in which of the following may result in a person’s blood failing to clot properly? 

 A antibodies 

 B fibrinogen 

 C haemoglobin 

 D protease 


© UCLES 2017 0610/22/M/J/17 

**21** Which is a function of some white blood cells? 

 A to carry glucose 

 B to carry oxygen 

 C to produce antibiotics 

 D to produce antibodies 

**22** A longitudinal section of the kidney and some associated structures have been labelled. 

 Which labelling is correct? 

 A 

 cortex 

 medulla 

 ureter 

 renal artery 

## B 

 cortex 

 medulla 

 ureter 

 renal vein 

## C 

 cortex 

 medulla 

 ureter 

 renal artery 

## D 

 cortex 

 medulla 

 ureter 

 renal artery 


© UCLES 2017 0610/22/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**23** The diagram shows a reflex arc. 

## X 

 not to scale 

 What is X? 

 A a relay neurone 

 B a synapse 

 C the effector 

 D the receptor 

**24** Which responses occur in the iris of the eye when a person walks from a dimly lit area to a brightly lit area? 

 circular muscle radial muscle 

 A contract contract 

 B contract relax 

 C relax contract 

 D relax relax 

**25** Which is the result of the release of adrenaline? 

 A constriction of pupils 

 B decrease in breathing rate 

 C decrease in pulse rate 

 D increase in blood glucose concentration 


© UCLES 2017 0610/22/M/J/17 

**26** Penicillin is an antibiotic that kills bacteria by preventing them from forming cell walls. 

 Why does penicillin not affect viruses? 

 A Viruses become resistant to penicillin. 

 B Viruses do not contain cytoplasm. 

 C Viruses do not have cell walls. 

 D Viruses reproduce very rapidly. 

**27** Dianthus flowers can be one of three different colours: red, pink or white. 

 A red flower is always homozygous and a white flower is always homozygous. Pink flowers are heterozygous. 

 If a red and a white flower are crossed, what percentage of the offspring will be pink? 

 A 0% B 25% C 75% D 100% 

**28** Which row correctly shows whether the nuclei of the cells are diploid or haploid? 

 body cells gametes zygote 

 A diploid diploid haploid 

 B diploid haploid diploid 

 C haploid diploid haploid 

 D haploid haploid diploid 

**29** What is a feature of self-pollination? 

 A It improves the capacity of a species to respond to changes in the environment. 

 B It increases variation in the offspring. 

 C Pollen grains are transferred from the anther of a flower to the stigma of a flower on a different plant. 

 D Pollen grains are transferred from the anther of a flower to the stigma of a flower on the same plant. 

**30** Which hormone causes the lining of the uterus to become thick and glandular before ovulation? 

 A FSH 

 B LH 

 C oestrogen 

 D progesterone 


© UCLES 2017 0610/22/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**31** Which blood component is destroyed in people who are HIV positive? 

 A lymphocytes 

 B phagocytes 

 C platelets 

 D red blood cells 

**32** Which row describes the genetic code in DNA? 

 what forms the genetic code what the DNA codes for 

 A sequence of amino acids sequence of bases 

 B sequence of amino acids sequence of proteins 

 C sequence of bases sequence of amino acids 

 D sequence of bases sequence of proteins 

**33** Cell division by meiosis of a parent cell with 23 pairs of chromosomes will result in 

 A 2 cells, each with 23 pairs of chromosomes. 

 B 2 cells, each with 23 single chromosomes. 

 C 4 cells, each with 23 pairs of chromosomes. 

 D 4 cells, each with 23 single chromosomes. 

**34** Colour blindness is a condition that occurs more frequently in men than in women. 

 Which statement about this condition is correct? 

 A It affects the cornea. 

 B It can pass from father to son. 

 C It is a sex-linked characteristic. 

 D The gene is on the Y chromosome. 

**35** Which feature is an example of discontinuous variation? 

 A blood group 

 B body mass 

 C foot size 

 D height 


© UCLES 2017 0610/22/M/J/17 

**36** In which processes is light energy converted to chemical energy? 

 photosynthesis plant respiration 

 A   

 B   

 C   

 D   

**37** The graph shows the changes in the populations of predator and prey over a period of time. 

 Which point on the graph shows a decrease in predator population? 

 number of individuals 

 time 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 

**38** Which feature of bacteria makes them useful in genetic engineering? 

 A They do not have mitochondria. 

 B They do not have vacuoles. 

 C They have plasmids. 

 D They have cell walls. 

**39** Why is yeast used in breadmaking? 

 A to produce alcohol 

 B to produce carbon dioxide 

 C to use up oxygen 

 D to use up sugar 


© UCLES 2017 0610/22/M/J/17 

**40** The graph shows the levels of dissolved oxygen and mineral ions in a river. 

 At which point does raw sewage enter the river? 

 distance along river 

 levels 

## A B C D 

 mineral ions 

 dissolved oxygen 

 direction of river flow 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2017 0610/22/M/J/17 

## BLANK PAGE 


