 This document has 16 pages. Blank pages are indicated. 

IB20 06_0620_21/2RP© UCLES 2020 (^) **[Turn over** 

## *4599385782* 

# Cambridge IGCSE ™ 

### CHEMISTRY 0620/21 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) May/June 2020 45 minutes You must answer on the multiple choice answer sheet. You will need: Multiple choice answer sheetSoft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) INSTRUCTIONS 

- There are **forty** questions on this paper. Answer **all** questions. 

- For each question there are four possible answersand record your choice in soft pencil on the multiple choice answer sheet. **A** , **B** , **C** and **D**. Choose the **one** you consider correct 

- Follow the instructions on the multiple choice answer sheet. 

- Write in soft pencil. 

- Write your name, centre number and candidate number on the multiple choice answer sheet in thespaces provided unless this has been done for you. 

- Do **not** use correction fluid. 

- Do **not** write on any bar codes. 

- You may use a calculator. **INFORMATION** 

- The total mark for this paper is 40. 

- Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. 

- Any rough working should be done on this question paper. 

- The Periodic Table is printed in the question paper. 


© UCLES 2020 0620/21/M/J/20 

**1** A mixture of ice and water is left to stand and the ice melts. Which row describes what happens as the ice is melting? temperature of mixture energy changes **A** increases average kinetic energy of particles increases **B** increases energy is used to overcome attractive forces **C** stays the same average kinetic energy of particles increases **D** stays the same energy is used to overcome attractive forces 

**2** Which piece of apparatus should be used to measure exactly 21.4 cm^3 of water? **A** 25 cm^3 beaker **B** 25 cm^3 pipette **C** 50 cm^3 burette **D** 50 cm^3 measuring cylinder 

**3** The chromatogram for an unknown dye is shown. 

 15 cm^12 cm 

 2 cm 

 9 cm 

 solvent front 

 What is the R f value of the dye? A 0.60 B 0.64 C 0.75 D 0.82 


© UCLES 2020 0620/21/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**4** The atomic number and nucleon number of a potassium atom are shown. 

 potassium atom atomic number 19 nucleon number 39 How many protons, neutrons and electrons are in a potassium ion, K +? protons neutrons electrons A 19 20 18 B 19 20 20 C 20 19 18 D 20 19 19 

**5** The electronic structures of two atoms, P and Q, are shown. 

### P Q 

 P and Q combine together to form a compound. What is the type of bonding in the compound and what is the formula of the compound? type of bonding formula A ionic PQ 

**B** ionic PQ (^2) **C** covalent PQ 2 **D** covalent PQ 


© UCLES 2020 0620/21/M/J/20 

**6** Which row contains a description of metallic bonding and a property that is explained byreference to metallic bonding? 

 description of metallic bonding 

 property explained by metallic bonding A a lattice of negative ionsin a sea of electrons acid, producing hydrogena metal will react with an B a lattice of negative ionsin a sea of electrons moulded into different shapesa piece of a metal can be C a lattice of positive ions in a sea of electrons 

 a metal will react with an acid, producing hydrogen D a lattice of positive ionsin a sea of electrons moulded into different shapesa piece of a metal can be 

**7** Which statement explains why methane has a lower boiling point than water? **A** Methane has weaker covalent bonds than water. **B** Methane has weaker attractive forces than water. **C** Methane molecules are heavier than water molecules. **D** Methane molecules have more bonds than water molecules. 

## 8 A solution of iron(III) sulfate reacts with aqueous sodium hydroxide to form a red–brown 

 precipitate. What is the balanced equation, including state symbols, for the reaction? A FeSO 4 (aq) + 2NaOH(aq) → Fe(OH) 2 (s) + Na 2 SO 4 (aq) B FeSO 4 (l) + 2NaOH(l) → Fe(OH) 2 (s) + Na 2 SO 4 (l) C Fe 2 (SO 4 ) 3 (aq) + 6NaOH(aq) → 2Fe(OH) 3 (s) + 3Na 2 SO 4 (aq) D Fe 2 (SO 4 ) 3 (l) + 6NaOH(aq) → 2Fe(OH) 3 (s) + 3Na 2 SO 4 (l) 

**9** The Haber process is a reversible reaction. N 2 (g) + 3H 2 (g) 2NH 3 (g) The reaction has a 30% yield of ammonia. Which volume of ammonia gas, NHby reacting 0.75 moles of hydrogen with excess nitrogen? 3 , measured at room temperature and pressure, is obtained **A** 3600 cm^3 **B** 5400 cm^3 **C** 12 000 cm^3 **D** 18 000 cm^3 


© UCLES 2020 0620/21/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**10** Dilute aqueous sodium chloride is electrolysed using platinum electrodes. What is the half-equation for the reaction at the cathode? **A** 2H+^ + 2e –^ → H 2 **B** Na +^ + e –^ → Na 

**C** 2C _l_ –^ → C _l_ (^) 2 + 2e – **D** 4OH–^ → 2H 2 O + O 2 + 4e – 

## 11 The electrolysis of aqueous copper(II) sulfate, using inert electrodes, is shown. 

## aqueous copper(II) sulfate 

### + – 

 Which statement about a reaction at an electrode is correct? A Copper ions gain electrons at the negative electrode. B Copper ions gain electrons at the positive electrode. C Hydrogen ions gain electrons at the negative electrode. D Hydrogen ions gain electrons at the positive electrode. 


© UCLES 2020 0620/21/M/J/20 

**12** The equation for the complete combustion of methane gas is shown. CH 4 (g) + 2O 2 (g) → CO 2 (g) + 2H 2 O(g) Bond energies are shown. bond bond energyin kJ / mol C–H 412 H–O 463 C=O 743 O=O 498 What is the overall energy change, in kJ / mol, for the above reaction? **A** –1192 **B** –694 **C** +694 **D** +1192 

**13** Which statements about hydrogen fuel cells are correct? 1 Water is formed as the only waste product. 2 Both water and carbon dioxide are formed as waste products. 3 The overall reaction is 2H 2 + O 2 → 2H 2 O. 4 The overall reaction is endothermic. **A** 1 and 3 **B** 1 and 4 **C** 2 and 3 **D** 2 and 4 

**14** Which diagram represents a chemical change? **A B** 

### C D 


© UCLES 2020 0620/21/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**15** The rate of reaction between calcium carbonate chips and hydrochloric acid is studied bycollecting the volume of gas released in one minute at different temperatures. 

 A graph of rate of reaction against temperature is shown. 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0 

 rate of reaction cm^3 / min 

 temperature / °C 

### 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 

 Which statement fully explains why increasing the temperature has this effect on the rate? A The kinetic energy of the particles increases so the collisions are harder. B The number of collisions between particles increases. C The activation energy needed for the particles to react is reduced. D There are more frequent collisions between particles with enough energy to react. 

**16** The equation shows the equilibrium between dinitrogen tetroxide, N 2 O 4 , and nitrogen dioxide, NO 2. The colours of the reactant and product are also shown. N 2 O 4 (g) 2NO 2 (g) colourless brown The forward reaction is endothermic. Which statement is **not** correct? **A** At equilibrium the concentrations of the reactant and the product are constant. **B** At equilibrium the rate of the forward reaction is equal to the rate of the reverse reaction. **C** When the pressure is increased a darker brown colour is seen. **D** When the temperature is increased a darker brown colour is seen. 


© UCLES 2020 0620/21/M/J/20 

**17** The equations for two reactions of iodide ions are shown. reaction 1 2 I–(aq) + H 2 O 2 (aq) → I 2 (aq) + 2OH–(aq) reaction 2 I–(aq) + Ag +(aq) → AgI(s) Which statement is correct? **A** Both reactions are redox reactions. **B** Neither reaction is a redox reaction. **C** Only reaction 1 is a redox reaction. **D** Only reaction 2 is a redox reaction. 

**18** The graph shows how the pH of a solution changes as an acid is added to an alkali. acid + alkali → salt + water Which letter represents the area of the graph where both acid and salt are present? 

 pH 

**A** (^) **B C** 

### D 

### 14 

### 7 

### 0 

 volume of acid added 

**19** Which statement describes a weak acid? **A** It is a proton acceptor and is fully ionised in aqueous solution. **B** It is a proton acceptor and is partially ionised in aqueous solution. **C** It is a proton donor and is fully ionised in aqueous solution. **D** It is a proton donor and is partially ionised in aqueous solution. 


© UCLES 2020 0620/21/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

## 20 The apparatus shown is used to prepare aqueous copper(II) sulfate. 

### Y 

 solid X 

 aqueous 

## copper(II) sulfate 

 excess of solid X 

 filter paper 

 heat 

 stirrer 

 What are X and Y? X Y 

## A copper aqueous iron(II) sulfate 

## B copper(II) chloride dilute sulfuric acid 

## C copper(II) oxide dilute sulfuric acid 

## D sulfur aqueous copper(II) chloride 

## 21 Lead(II) sulfate is an insoluble salt. 

## Which method is suitable for obtaining solid lead(II) sulfate? 

## A Mix aqueous lead(II) nitrate and aqueous potassium sulfate, heat to evaporate all of the 

 water, collect the solid and then wash and dry it. 

## B Mix aqueous lead(II) nitrate and aqueous potassium sulfate, filter, collect the filtrate, 

 crystallise, then wash and dry the crystals. 

## C Mix aqueous lead(II) nitrate and dilute sulfuric acid, filter, then wash and dry the residue. 

## D Titrate aqueous lead(II) hydroxide with dilute sulfuric acid, crystallise, then wash and dry the 

 crystals. 

**22** A Group I metal (lithium, sodium or potassium) is reacted with a Group VII element (chlorine, bromine or iodine). Which compound is formed when the Group I metal of highest density reacts with the Group VII element of lowest density? **A** lithium chloride **B** potassium chloride **C** potassium iodide **D** lithium iodide 


© UCLES 2020 0620/21/M/J/20 

**23** The properties of the element titanium, Ti, can be predicted from its position in the Periodic Table. Which row identifies the properties of titanium? can be used as a catalyst 

 conducts electricity when solid has low density^ 

 forms coloured compounds A     B     C     D     

**24** A balloon is filled with helium. Helium is a noble gas and makes the balloon rise up in the air. The density of air is 1.23 g / dm^3. Which gas is helium? density in g / dm^3 reaction with oxygen **A** 0.0899 burns rapidly **B** 0.179 does not react with oxygen **C** 1.78 does not react with oxygen **D** 3.75 does not react with oxygen 

**25** Which property is shown by **all** metals? **A** They are extracted from their ores by heating with carbon. **B** They conduct electricity. **C** They form acidic oxides. **D** They react with hydrochloric acid to form hydrogen. 


© UCLES 2020 0620/21/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**26** Sodium nitrate is a white crystalline solid that decomposes on heating. 

 heat 

 sodium nitrate 

 Which row describes the decomposition products formed when sodium nitrate is heated strongly? solid products gaseous products A sodium nitrite NO 2 and O 2 B sodium nitrite O 2 only C sodium oxide NO 2 and O 2 D sodium oxide O 2 only 

**27** Molten iron from the blast furnace contains impurities. The process of turning the impure iron into steel involves blowing oxygen into the molten iron andadding calcium oxide. 

 What are the reasons for blowing in oxygen and adding calcium oxide? blowing in oxygen adding calcium oxide A carbon is removed by reacting with oxygen reacts with acidic impurities making slag B carbon is removed by reacting with oxygen reacts with slag and so removes it C iron reacts with the oxygen reacts with acidic impurities making slag D iron reacts with the oxygen reacts with slag and so removes it 

## 28 Element Y reacts with copper(II) oxide to form copper. 

 Element Y will not react with zinc oxide. Copper has no reaction with zinc oxide. What is the order of reactivity of these three elements, most reactive first? A Cu → Y → Zn B Cu → Zn → Y C Zn → Cu → Y D Zn → Y → Cu 


© UCLES 2020 0620/21/M/J/20 

**29** Which statement shows that a liquid is pure water? **A** It boils at 100 °C. **B** It has a pH value of 7. 

## C It turns blue cobalt(II) chloride pink. 

## D It turns white copper(II) sulfate blue. 

**30** Which process removes carbon dioxide from the atmosphere? **A** combustion **B** decomposition **C** photosynthesis **D** respiration 

**31** Ammonia is manufactured by the Haber process. N 2 (g) + 3H 2 (g) 2NH 3 (g) What are the conditions used in the Haber process? temperature / °C 

 pressure / atm A 400 100 B 400 300 C 20 300 D 20 100 

**32** Coating iron helps to prevent rusting. Which coating will continue to protect the iron even when the coating is damaged? **A** copper **B** paint **C** plastic **D** zinc 


© UCLES 2020 0620/21/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**33** A student suggests three uses of calcium carbonate (limestone). 1 manufacture of cement 2 manufacture of iron 3 treating alkaline soils Which suggestions are correct? **A** 1 and 2 only **B** 1 and 3 only **C** 2 and 3 only **D** 1, 2 and 3 

**34** The Contact process is used to manufacture concentrated sulfuric acid and consists of four steps. Which step involves a catalyst? **A** production of sulfur dioxide gas **B** production of sulfur trioxide gas **C** production of oleum **D** production of concentrated sulfuric acid 

**35** Which row about the production of ethanol by fermentation is correct? 

 raw materials energy requirement rate of reaction A non-renewable high slow B renewable low slow C non-renewable low fast D renewable high fast 

**36** Which statement about homologous series is correct? **A** Members of a homologous series have the same structural formula. **B** Members of a homologous series all have similar chemical properties. **C** Members of a homologous series all have similar physical properties. **D** Members of all homologous series are hydrocarbons. 


© UCLES 2020 0620/21/M/J/20 

**37** Increasing the number of atoms in one molecule of a hydrocarbon increases the amount ofenergy released when it burns. 

 What is the correct order? less energyreleased more energyreleased A ethene ethane methane B ethene methane ethane C methane ethane ethene D methane ethene ethane 

**38** Some properties of an organic compound J are listed. ● It is a liquid at room temperature. ● It is soluble in water. ● A solution of J reacts with calcium carbonate to form carbon dioxide. ● A solution of J has a pH of 3. In which homologous series does J belong? **A** alkane **B** alkene **C** alcohol **D** carboxylic acid 

**39** Ethane, C 2 H 6 , reacts with chlorine in a substitution reaction. What are the products of this reaction? **A** chloroethane and hydrogen **B** chloroethane and hydrogen chloride **C** chloroethene and hydrogen **D** chloroethene and hydrogen chloride 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeAssessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University ofCambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2020 0620/21/M/J/20 

**40** Which polymers or types of polymer are synthetic? 1 carbohydrates 2 nylon 3 proteins 4 _Terylene_ **A** 1 and 3 **B** 1 and 4 **C** 2 and 3 **D** 2 and 4 


© UCLES 2020 0620/21/M/J/20 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements^1 Hhydrogen^1 

(^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Beberyllium 9 **Key** atomic numberatomic symbol name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mgmagnesium 24 19 Kpotassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Srstrontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Gegermanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 (^22) Tititanium (^4840) Zrzirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rfrutherfordium– 23 Vvanadium (^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Crchromium (^5242) Momolybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sgseaborgium– (^25) Mnmanganese (^5543) Tctechnetium– (^75) Rerhenium (^186107) Bhbohrium– (^26) Feiron (^5644) Ruruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Iriridium (^192109) Mtmeitnerium– (^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pdpalladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Dsdarmstadtium– (^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rgroentgenium– (^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cdcadmium (^11280) Hgmercury (^201112) Cncopernicium– 114 F _l_ flerovium– (^116) Lvlivermorium– (^7) Nnitrogen 1415 Pphosphorus (^3133) Asarsenic (^7551) Sbantimony 12283 Bibismuth 209 (^8) Ooxygen 1616 Ssulfur (^3234) Seselenium (^7952) Tetellurium (^12884) Popolonium– (^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Brbromine 8053 I iodine 12785 Atastatine– (^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Scscandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) Lalanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). actinium– (^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium^141 (^91) Paprotactinium 231 (^60) Ndneodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pmpromethium– (^93) Npneptunium– (^62) Smsamarium (^15094) Puplutonium– (^63) Eueuropium (^15295) Amamericium– (^64) Gdgadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bkberkelium– (^66) Dydysprosium 16398 Cfcalifornium– (^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Eseinsteinium– (^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Mdmendelevium– (^70) Ybytterbium (^173102) Nonobelium– (^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lrlawrencium– 


