 This document has 16 pages. Blank pages are indicated. 

IB20 06_0620_13/3RP© UCLES 2020 (^) **[Turn over** 

## *3429027885* 

# Cambridge IGCSE ™ 

### CHEMISTRY 0620/13 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) May/June 2020 45 minutes You must answer on the multiple choice answer sheet. You will need: Multiple choice answer sheetSoft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) INSTRUCTIONS 

- There are **forty** questions on this paper. Answer **all** questions. 

- For each question there are four possible answersand record your choice in soft pencil on the multiple choice answer sheet. **A** , **B** , **C** and **D**. Choose the **one** you consider correct 

- Follow the instructions on the multiple choice answer sheet. 

- Write in soft pencil. 

- Write your name, centre number and candidate number on the multiple choice answer sheet in thespaces provided unless this has been done for you. 

- Do **not** use correction fluid. 

- Do **not** write on any bar codes. 

- You may use a calculator. **INFORMATION** 

- The total mark for this paper is 40. 

- Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. 

- Any rough working should be done on this question paper. 

- The Periodic Table is printed in the question paper. 


© UCLES 2020 0620/13/M/J/20 

**1** Descriptions of the three states of matter are shown. 

 separationparticle arrangementparticle type of motion 1 small random move past each other at low speed 2 large random rapid motion in straight lines 3 small regular vibration Which row is correct? 1 2 3 A gas liquid solid B liquid solid gas C liquid gas solid D solid gas liquid 

**2** Which piece of apparatus is used to measure 13.7 cm^3 of dilute hydrochloric acid? **A** balance **B** burette **C** conical flask **D** pipette 

**3** Ethanol can be made by fermentation of sugar, using yeast. This produces a mixture of ethanol and water. How is ethanol separated from this mixture? **A** Filter the mixture. **B** Heat to evaporate the water. **C** Heat to evaporate most of the water, and allow the ethanol to crystallise. **D** Distil the mixture using a fractionating column. 


© UCLES 2020 0620/13/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**4** The structure of an atom of element X is shown. 

 5p6n 

 key = electron = neutron = proton 

 n p 

 What is element X? A boron B carbon C sodium D sulfur 

**5** Which statement about the bonding in sodium chloride is correct? **A** Pairs of electrons are shared between the sodium and chlorine atoms. **B** Chlorine atoms give electrons to sodium atoms to form positive and negative ions. **C** There is covalent bonding between sodium and chlorine. **D** The positive and negative ions have noble gas electronic structures. 

**6** The electronic structures of two atoms, P and Q, are shown. 

### P Q 

 P and Q combine together to form a compound. What is the type of bonding in the compound and what is the formula of the compound? type of bonding formula A ionic PQ 

**B** ionic PQ (^2) **C** covalent PQ 2 **D** covalent PQ 


© UCLES 2020 0620/13/M/J/20 

**7** Diamond and graphite are macromolecules. Which statement is correct for **both** diamond and graphite? **A** They act as lubricants. **B** They conduct electricity. **C** They have high melting points. **D** They are very hard. 

**8** Aluminium oxide has the formula A _l_ (^) 2 O 3. Which statement about aluminium oxide is correct? **A** 2 g of aluminium atoms are combined with 3 g of oxygen atoms. **B** 2 g of aluminium atoms are combined with 3 g of oxygen molecules. **C** Aluminium oxide has a relative formula mass of 102. **D** Pure aluminium oxide contains a higher mass of oxygen than of aluminium. **9** Which statement about electrolysis is **not** correct? **A** Bromine is produced at the cathode in the electrolysis of molten lead bromide. **B** Electrolysis is the breakdown of a substance by electricity. **C** Hydrogen is one of the products in the electrolysis of concentrated aqueous sodium chloride. **D** Platinum is used as an inert electrode. **10** Which statements about 235 U are correct? 1 It is a radioactive isotope. 2 It burns in air to produce greenhouse gases. 3 It is used as an energy source. **A** 1 only **B** 1 and 3 only **C** 1, 2 and 3 **D** 2 and 3 only 


© UCLES 2020 0620/13/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**11** The energy level diagram shows the energy of the reactants and products in a chemical reaction. 

 reactants 

 progress of reaction 

 products 

 energy 

 Which row correctly describes the energy change and the type of reaction shown? 

 energy changedescription of type of reaction A energy is given out to the surroundings 

 endothermic B energy is given out to the surroundings 

 exothermic C energy is taken in from the surroundings 

 endothermic D energy is taken in from the surroundings 

 exothermic 

**12** In which tube is a physical change taking place? **A** 

 water 

 iron nail 

### B 

 water 

 sodium chloride 

### C 

 dilute hydrochloric acid 

 dilute hydrochloric acid 

### D 

 calcium carbonate 

 magnesium 


© UCLES 2020 0620/13/M/J/20 

**13** Magnesium is reacted with dilute hydrochloric acid of the same concentration in four experimentsusing different conditions. 

 Which reaction finished in the shortest time? A 2 g of magnesium powder in 50 cm^3 of dilute HC l at 45 °C B 2 g of magnesium powder in 50 cm^3 of dilute HC l at 50 °C C 2 g of magnesium ribbon in 50 cm^3 of dilute HC l at 45 °C D 2 g of magnesium ribbon in 50 cm^3 of dilute HC l at 50 °C 

## 14 Blue copper(II) sulfate crystals are heated in air until they turn into a white powder. 

 The powder is allowed to cool and after a few days it starts to turn blue. Why does the white powder start to turn blue? 

## A Carbon dioxide in the air reacts with the powder to form copper(II) carbonate. 

## B The powder reacts with water in the air to form copper(II) hydroxide. 

 C The white copper compound is slowly oxidised. D Water is absorbed from the air and causes the reaction to reverse. 

**15** Steam reacts with carbon to produce carbon monoxide and hydrogen. 

 C(s) + H 2 O(g) → CO(g) + H 2 (g) Which substance is reduced in the reaction? A carbon B carbon monoxide C hydrogen D water 


© UCLES 2020 0620/13/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**16** The graph shows how the pH of a solution changes as an acid is added to an alkali. acid + alkali → salt + water Which letter represents the area of the graph where both acid and salt are present? 

 pH 

**A** (^) **B C** 

### D 

### 14 

### 7 

(^0) volume of acid added **17** Element E is in Group II of the Periodic Table. Which row describes element E and its oxide? element E oxide of E **A** metal acidic **B** metal basic **C** non-metal acidic **D** non-metal basic 


© UCLES 2020 0620/13/M/J/20 

## 18 The apparatus shown is used to prepare aqueous copper(II) sulfate. 

### Y 

 solid X 

 aqueous 

## copper(II) sulfate 

 excess of solid X 

 filter paper 

 heat 

 stirrer 

 What are X and Y? X Y 

## A copper aqueous iron(II) sulfate 

## B copper(II) chloride dilute sulfuric acid 

## C copper(II) oxide dilute sulfuric acid 

## D sulfur aqueous copper(II) chloride 

**19** Four different colourless solutions are each tested separately with aqueous sodium hydroxideand with acidified silver nitrate. 

 Which solution is sodium chloride? 

 sodium hydroxideaqueous silver nitrateacidified A no visible reaction white precipitate B no visible reaction no visible reaction C white precipitate no visible reaction D white precipitate white precipitate 

**20** Which statement about elements in Period 3 of the Periodic Table is correct? **A** Aluminium is a non-metal in Group III. **B** Argon is in Group VIII and has eight electrons in its outer shell. **C** Magnesium is in Group II and has three electrons in its outer shell. **D** Sulfur is a metal in Group VI. 


© UCLES 2020 0620/13/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**21** The elements in Group I include lithium, sodium and potassium. Which statements about these elements are correct? 1 Sodium is denser than lithium. 2 Lithium has a lower melting point than potassium. 3 Potassium is a relatively soft metal. 4 Sodium is less reactive than lithium but more reactive than potassium. **A** 1 and 2 **B** 1 and 3 **C** 2 and 4 **D** 3 and 4 

**22** The properties of the element titanium, Ti, can be predicted from its position in the Periodic Table. Which row identifies the properties of titanium? 

 as a catalystcan be used conducts electricitywhen solid has low density^ forms colouredcompounds A     B     C     D     

**23** Which statement about the noble gases is correct? **A** Argon is used in light bulbs and balloons. **B** Helium reacts with oxygen in the air. **C** They all have full outer electron shells. **D** They are all diatomic molecules. 

**24** Which property is shown by **all** metals? **A** They are extracted from their ores by heating with carbon. **B** They conduct electricity. **C** They form acidic oxides. **D** They react with hydrochloric acid to form hydrogen. 


© UCLES 2020 0620/13/M/J/20 

**25** P, Q, R and S are metals. P reacts with dilute hydrochloric acid forming hydrogen. Q reacts violently with water. R reacts with water to give hydrogen. S is formed by heating its oxide with carbon Which row identifies the metals? P Q R S **A** copper sodium potassium iron **B** zinc magnesium calcium iron **C** zinc sodium calcium magnesium **D** iron potassium sodium zinc 

**26** Molten iron from the blast furnace contains impurities. The process of turning the impure iron into steel involves blowing oxygen into the molten iron and adding calcium oxide. What are the reasons for blowing in oxygen and adding calcium oxide? blowing in oxygen adding calcium oxide **A** carbon is removed by reacting with oxygen reacts with acidic impurities making slag **B** carbon is removed by reacting with oxygen reacts with slag and so removes it **C** iron reacts with the oxygen reacts with acidic impurities making slag **D** iron reacts with the oxygen reacts with slag and so removes it 

**27** Why is stainless steel used to make cutlery? **A** It does not corrode. **B** It has a low density. **C** It is a good conductor of electricity. **D** It is a good conductor of heat. 


© UCLES 2020 0620/13/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**28** Which substances can be used to detect the presence of water? 

## 1 cobalt(II) chloride 

## 2 copper(II) sulfate 

 3 litmus 4 methyl orange A 1 and 2 B 1 and 3 C 2 and 4 D 3 and 4 

**29** Which two compounds are formed by the burning of fossil fuels and are atmospheric pollutants? **A** carbon dioxide and hydrogen chloride **B** carbon monoxide and sulfur dioxide **C** oxides of nitrogen and water **D** oxides of nitrogen and ammonia 

**30** The diagrams show experiments to investigate rusting of iron nails. 3 

 boiled water 

### 2 

 salt water 

### 1 

 tap water 

 layer of oil 

 In which test-tubes do the nails rust? A 1 only B 1 and 2 only C 1 and 3 only D 1, 2 and 3 


© UCLES 2020 0620/13/M/J/20 

**31** A farmer knows his soil needs phosphorus and potassium. He has a choice of four fertilisers. 1 NH 4 NO 3 2 (NH 4 ) 3 PO 4 3 KNO 3 4 (NH 2 ) 2 CO Which fertilisers should he use? **A** 1 and 2 **B** 1 and 4 **C** 2 and 3 **D** 3 and 4 

**32** Which process is a source of methane? **A** respiration **B** combustion of ethanol **C** decomposition of calcium carbonate **D** decomposition of vegetation 

**33** The list shows four methods that were suggested for the formation of carbon dioxide. 1 cracking methane using steam 2 action of heat on a carbonate 3 complete combustion of methane 4 reaction of a carbonate with oxygen Which methods would result in the production of carbon dioxide? **A** 1 and 2 **B** 1 and 4 **C** 2 and 3 **D** 3 and 4 

**34** A student suggests three uses of calcium carbonate (limestone). 1 manufacture of cement 2 manufacture of iron 3 treating alkaline soils Which suggestions are correct? **A** 1 and 2 only **B** 1 and 3 only **C** 2 and 3 only **D** 1, 2 and 3 


© UCLES 2020 0620/13/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**35** Which list shows the fractions obtained from distilling petroleum, in order of increasing boilingpoint? 

 A bitumen → diesel oil → fuel oil → lubricating oil B diesel oil → gasoline → naphtha → kerosene C gasoline → naphtha → kerosene → diesel oil D kerosene → lubricating oil → naphtha → refinery gas 

**36** Which structure represents a compound in the alcohol homologous series? 

 O 

 O 

### A 

### C 

### H 

### H 

### C H 

### H 

### H 

### H 

### B 

### C 

### H 

### H 

### C 

### H 

### C 

### H 

### H 

### H 

### D 

### C C 

### H 

### H 

### C H 

### H 

H (^) H 

### C 

### C 

### H 

### O 

### C 

### H 

### H 

### H 

### C H 

### H 

### H 

### H 

**37** Increasing the number of atoms in one molecule of a hydrocarbon increases the amount ofenergy released when it burns. 

 What is the correct order? less energyreleased more energyreleased A ethene ethane methane B ethene methane ethane C methane ethane ethene D methane ethene ethane 

**38** Compound X has the molecular formula C 2 H 6 O. Which statement about compound X is correct? **A** X is unsaturated. **B** X is a carboxylic acid. **C** X is formed by the reaction of ethane with steam. **D** X is used as a fuel. 


© UCLES 2020 0620/13/M/J/20 

**39** A small quantity of a solid chemical is added to a large excess of aqueous ethanoic acid. No bubbles of gas are seen and the solid dissolves to give a colourless solution. What was the solid chemical? **A** calcium hydroxide 

## B copper(II) oxide 

 C magnesium D sodium carbonate 

**40** Which statement about carbohydrates and proteins is correct? **A** Carbohydrates and proteins are constituents of food. **B** Carbohydrates and proteins are natural polymers used to make larger molecules called monomers. **C** Carbohydrates and proteins are synthetic polymers. **D** Carbohydrates and proteins cause pollution as they are non-biodegradable. 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeAssessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University ofCambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2020 0620/13/M/J/20 

### BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2020 0620/13/M/J/20 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements^1 Hhydrogen^1 

(^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Beberyllium 9 **Key** atomic numberatomic symbol name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mgmagnesium 24 19 Kpotassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Srstrontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Gegermanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 (^22) Tititanium (^4840) Zrzirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rfrutherfordium– 23 Vvanadium (^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Crchromium (^5242) Momolybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sgseaborgium– (^25) Mnmanganese (^5543) Tctechnetium– (^75) Rerhenium (^186107) Bhbohrium– (^26) Feiron (^5644) Ruruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Ir iridium (^192109) Mtmeitnerium– (^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pdpalladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Dsdarmstadtium– (^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rgroentgenium– (^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cdcadmium (^11280) Hgmercury (^201112) Cncopernicium– 114 F _l_ flerovium– (^116) Lvlivermorium– (^7) Nnitrogen 1415 Pphosphorus (^3133) Asarsenic (^7551) Sbantimony 12283 Bibismuth 209 (^8) Ooxygen 1616 Ssulfur (^3234) Seselenium (^7952) Tetellurium (^12884) Popolonium– (^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Brbromine 8053 I iodine 12785 Atastatine– (^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Scscandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) Lalanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). actinium– (^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium^141 (^91) Paprotactinium 231 (^60) Ndneodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pmpromethium– (^93) Npneptunium– (^62) Smsamarium (^15094) Puplutonium– (^63) Eueuropium (^15295) Amamericium– (^64) Gdgadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bkberkelium– (^66) Dydysprosium 16398 Cfcalifornium– (^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Eseinsteinium– (^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Mdmendelevium– (^70) Ybytterbium (^173102) Nonobelium– (^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lrlawrencium– 


