 This document has 16 pages. Blank pages are indicated. 

 IB20 06_0620_12/3RP 

© UCLES 2020 (^) **[Turn over** 

## *1498871495* 

# Cambridge IGCSE 

## ™ 

### CHEMISTRY 0620/12 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) May/June 2020 45 minutes 

 You must answer on the multiple choice answer sheet. 

 You will need: Multiple choice answer sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 INSTRUCTIONS 

- There are **forty** questions on this paper. Answer **all** questions. 

- For each question there are four possible answers **A** , **B** , **C** and **D**. Choose the **one** you consider correct     and record your choice in soft pencil on the multiple choice answer sheet. 

- Follow the instructions on the multiple choice answer sheet. 

- Write in soft pencil. 

- Write your name, centre number and candidate number on the multiple choice answer sheet in the     spaces provided unless this has been done for you. 

- Do **not** use correction fluid. 

- Do **not** write on any bar codes. 

- You may use a calculator. 

 INFORMATION 

- The total mark for this paper is 40. 

- Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. 

- Any rough working should be done on this question paper. 

- The Periodic Table is printed in the question paper. 


© UCLES 2020 0620/12/M/J/20 

**1** Each rectangle shows the arrangement of particles in each of the three states of matter. 

 X, Y and Z represent the processes needed to change from one state to another. 

### Z 

### X Y 

 What are the processes X, Y and Z? 

### X Y Z 

 A evaporating subliming condensing 

 B evaporating subliming freezing 

 C subliming evaporating condensing 

 D subliming evaporating freezing 

**2** Which piece of apparatus is used to measure 25.0 cm^3 of aqueous sodium hydroxide? 

 A B C D 

**3** Which process is used to produce drinking water from sea water? 

 A crystallisation 

 B distillation 

 C filtration 

 D chlorination 


© UCLES 2020 0620/12/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**4** The diagram shows the electronic structure of a particle with a nucleon number (mass number) of 40. 

 e 

 e 

 e e e e 

 e e e 

 e e 

 e e 

 e e 

 e e 

 e 

### 40 

 The table shows the suggestions that three students, 1, 2 and 3, made to identify the particle. 

 student 

 1 2 3 

 particle Ar C l Ca 2+ 

 Which students are correct? 

 A 1 and 2 only B 1 and 3 only C 2 and 3 only D 1, 2 and 3 

**5** The Group I element sodium forms an ionic bond with the Group VII element fluorine. 

 Which two ions are produced? 

 A Na +^ and F +^ B Na +^ and F –^ C Na –^ and F –^ D Na –^ and F + 

**6** The electronic structures of two atoms, P and Q, are shown. 

### P Q 

 P and Q combine together to form a compound. 

 What is the type of bonding in the compound and what is the formula of the compound? 

 type of bonding formula 

 A ionic PQ 

**B** ionic PQ (^2) **C** covalent PQ 2 **D** covalent PQ 


© UCLES 2020 0620/12/M/J/20 

**7** Graphite is a macromolecule. 

 Which statements about graphite are correct? 

 1 Carbon atoms form four covalent bonds with neighbouring atoms. 

 2 There are free electrons between layers of carbon atoms. 

 3 Graphite is a useful lubricant. 

 4 Graphite is a good conductor of electricity. 

 A 1 and 2 B 1, 3 and 4 C 2, 3 and 4 D 3 and 4 only 

**8** Aluminium oxide has the formula A _l_ (^) 2 O 3. Which statement about aluminium oxide is correct? **A** 2 g of aluminium atoms are combined with 3 g of oxygen atoms. **B** 2 g of aluminium atoms are combined with 3 g of oxygen molecules. **C** Aluminium oxide has a relative formula mass of 102. **D** Pure aluminium oxide contains a higher mass of oxygen than of aluminium. **9** Dilute sulfuric acid is electrolysed using carbon electrodes. Which row shows the products formed at each electrode? anode cathode **A** hydrogen oxygen **B** hydrogen sulfur **C** oxygen hydrogen **D** oxygen sulfur **10** Which fuel does **not** rely on combustion to release energy? **A** gasoline **B** hydrogen **C** methane **D** uranium 


© UCLES 2020 0620/12/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**11** The energy level diagram shows the energy of the reactants and products in a chemical reaction. 

 reactants 

 progress of reaction 

 products 

 energy 

 Which row correctly describes the energy change and the type of reaction shown? 

 description of energy change type of reaction 

 A energy is given out to the surroundings 

 endothermic 

 B energy is given out to the surroundings 

 exothermic 

 C energy is taken in from the surroundings 

 endothermic 

 D energy is taken in from the surroundings 

 exothermic 

**12** Which list contains **only** chemical changes? 

 A melting, evaporating, dissolving 

 B rusting, freezing, subliming 

 C neutralisation, polymerisation, combustion 

 D boiling, condensing, distillation 

**13** Which row shows the changes that **all** increase the rate of a chemical reaction? 

 concentration of reactants temperature particle size 

 A decrease decrease decrease 

 B decrease increase increase 

 C increase decrease increase 

 D increase increase decrease 


© UCLES 2020 0620/12/M/J/20 

**14** Which reaction is reversible? 

 A an iron nail rusting when left in moist air 

 B limestone reacting with an acid to form carbon dioxide gas 

 C magnesium burning in air to produce a white ash 

## D white anhydrous copper(II) sulfate turning blue when water is added 

## 15 When heated strongly, silicon(IV) oxide reacts with carbon. 

 SiO 2 + 2C → Si + 2CO 

## Which term describes what happens to silicon(IV) oxide? 

 A thermal decomposition 

 B neutralisation 

 C oxidation 

 D reduction 

**16** The graph shows how the pH of a solution changes as an acid is added to an alkali. 

 acid + alkali → salt + water 

 Which letter represents the area of the graph where both acid and salt are present? 

 pH 

### A 

### B 

### C 

### D 

### 14 

### 7 

### 0 

 volume of acid added 

**17** Element G is a metal in Group I of the Periodic Table and element H is a non-metal in Group VII. Both of these elements form oxides. 

 Which statement about their oxides is correct? 

 A Both oxides are acidic. 

 B Both oxides are basic. 

 C The oxide of G is acidic and the oxide of H is basic. 

 D The oxide of H is acidic and the oxide of G is basic. 


© UCLES 2020 0620/12/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

## 18 The apparatus shown is used to prepare aqueous copper(II) sulfate. 

### Y 

 solid X 

 aqueous 

## copper(II) sulfate 

 excess of solid X 

 filter paper 

 heat 

 stirrer 

 What are X and Y? 

### X Y 

## A copper aqueous iron(II) sulfate 

## B copper(II) chloride dilute sulfuric acid 

## C copper(II) oxide dilute sulfuric acid 

## D sulfur aqueous copper(II) chloride 

**19** An aqueous solution of a compound M is tested. 

 The results are shown. 

 ● It gave a lilac colour in a flame test. 

 ● It produced a white precipitate when tested with acidified barium nitrate. 

 What is M? 

## A copper(II) chloride 

## B copper(II) sulfate 

 C potassium carbonate 

 D potassium sulfate 


© UCLES 2020 0620/12/M/J/20 

**20** The character of the elements and charges on the ions of the elements change across the Periodic Table. 

 Which row describes the elements on the left of the table and the elements on the right? 

 elements on the left elements on the right 

 character charge on ion character charge on ion 

 A metallic positive non-metallic negative 

 B metallic negative non-metallic positive 

 C non-metallic positive metallic negative 

 D non-metallic negative metallic positive 

**21** Which statement about Group I and Group VII elements is correct? 

 A Group VII elements are monoatomic non-metals. 

 B Lithium is more reactive with water than caesium. 

 C The melting points of Group I metals increase down the group. 

 D Potassium bromide reacts with chlorine to produce an orange solution. 

**22** The properties of the element titanium, Ti, can be predicted from its position in the Periodic Table. 

 Which row identifies the properties of titanium? 

 can be used as a catalyst 

 conducts electricity when solid has low density forms coloured compounds 

### A     

### B     

### C     

### D     

**23** Which diagram shows a mixture of noble gases? 

 A B C D 


© UCLES 2020 0620/12/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**24** Which property is shown by **all** metals? 

 A They are extracted from their ores by heating with carbon. 

 B They conduct electricity. 

 C They form acidic oxides. 

 D They react with hydrochloric acid to form hydrogen. 

**25** The reactions of four metals, W, X, Y and Z, are shown. 

 metal observations 

 W reacts with steam and hydrochloric acid but not cold water 

 X reacts with hydrochloric acid but not with steam or cold water 

 Y reacts with hydrochloric acid and cold water 

 Z does not react with hydrochloric acid 

 What is the order of reactivity for metals W, X, Y and Z? 

 most reactive 

 least reactive 

 A Y W X Z 

 B Y X W Z 

 C Z W X Y 

 D Z X W Y 

**26** Molten iron from the blast furnace contains impurities. 

 The process of turning the impure iron into steel involves blowing oxygen into the molten iron and adding calcium oxide. 

 What are the reasons for blowing in oxygen and adding calcium oxide? 

 blowing in oxygen adding calcium oxide 

 A carbon is removed by reacting with oxygen reacts with acidic impurities making slag 

 B carbon is removed by reacting with oxygen reacts with slag and so removes it 

 C iron reacts with the oxygen reacts with acidic impurities making slag 

 D iron reacts with the oxygen reacts with slag and so removes it 


© UCLES 2020 0620/12/M/J/20 

**27** Which statement about mild steel explains why it is a good choice for car bodies? 

 A It is cheap and strong. 

 B It is a good conductor. 

 C It is low density. 

 D It resists rusting. 

**28** Which statement about pure water is **not** correct? 

 A It condenses at 100 °C. 

 B It freezes at 0 °C. 

## C It turns cobalt(II) chloride paper blue. 

## D It turns anhydrous copper(II) sulfate blue. 

**29** Which compounds **both** contribute to ‘acid rain’? 

 A carbon monoxide and lead compounds 

 B carbon monoxide and oxides of nitrogen 

 C oxides of nitrogen and sulfur dioxide 

 D sulfur dioxide and lead compounds 

**30** The diagrams show experiments to investigate rusting of iron nails. 

### 3 

 boiled water 

### 2 

 salt water 

### 1 

 tap water 

 layer of oil 

 In which test-tubes do the nails rust? 

 A 1 only B 1 and 2 only C 1 and 3 only D 1, 2 and 3 


© UCLES 2020 0620/12/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**31** Which bag is **not** suitable for use as a fertiliser? 

 A 

 ammonium nitrate NH 4 NO 3 

### B 

 potassium sulfate K 2 SO 4 

### C 

 sodium chloride NaC l 

### D 

 sodium phosphate Na 3 PO 4 

**32** X is a colourless greenhouse gas. 

 It is a waste product from digestion in animals. 

 It is generally unreactive, but it can be burnt. 

 What is X? 

 A carbon dioxide 

 B methane 

 C nitrogen 

 D sulfur dioxide 

**33** The list shows four methods that were suggested for the formation of carbon dioxide. 

 1 cracking methane using steam 

 2 action of heat on a carbonate 

 3 complete combustion of methane 

 4 reaction of a carbonate with oxygen 

 Which methods would result in the production of carbon dioxide? 

 A 1 and 2 B 1 and 4 C 2 and 3 D 3 and 4 

**34** A student suggests three uses of calcium carbonate (limestone). 

 1 manufacture of cement 

 2 manufacture of iron 

 3 treating alkaline soils 

 Which suggestions are correct? 

 A 1 and 2 only B 1 and 3 only C 2 and 3 only D 1, 2 and 3 


© UCLES 2020 0620/12/M/J/20 

**35** Which list shows the fractions obtained from distilling petroleum, in order of increasing boiling point? 

 A bitumen → diesel oil → fuel oil → lubricating oil 

 B diesel oil → gasoline → naphtha → kerosene 

 C gasoline → naphtha → kerosene → diesel oil 

 D kerosene → lubricating oil → naphtha → refinery gas 

**36** The structures of four compounds are shown. 

### C C 

### H 

### H 

### H 

### H 

### H C 

### H 

### H 

### C 

### H 

### 1 2 

### H 

### H H C 

### H 

### H 

### C 

### H 

### 3 

### H 

### O H H C 

### H 

### H 

### C C 

### H 

### H 

### H 

### H 

### 4 

### H 

 Which compounds are members of the same homologous series? 

 A 1 and 2 only B 1 and 4 C 1, 2 and 3 D 2 and 4 

**37** Increasing the number of atoms in one molecule of a hydrocarbon increases the amount of energy released when it burns. 

 What is the correct order? 

 less energy released 

 more energy released 

 A ethene ethane methane 

 B ethene methane ethane 

 C methane ethane ethene 

 D methane ethene ethane 

**38** Which statement about alcohols is correct? 

 A Alcohols and carboxylic acids have the same functional group. 

 B Ethanoic acid is produced from the reduction of ethanol. 

 C Ethanol is produced in an addition reaction between ethene and hydrogen. 

 D Water is produced from the combustion of alcohols. 


© UCLES 2020 0620/12/M/J/20 

**39** An organic compound, P, reacts with zinc to produce a gas, Q. 

 What are P and Q? 

### P Q 

 A ethanoic acid carbon dioxide 

 B ethanoic acid hydrogen 

 C ethanol carbon dioxide 

 D ethanol hydrogen 

**40** Which substances are natural polymers? 

 1 proteins 

 2 carbohydrates 

 3 nylon 

 4 poly(ethene) 

 A 1 and 2 B 1 and 3 C 2 and 3 D 3 and 4 


© UCLES 2020 0620/12/M/J/20 

### BLANK PAGE 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2020 0620/12/M/J/20 

### BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2020 0620/12/M/J/20 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements 

(^1) H hydrogen 1 (^2) He helium 4 I^ II^ III IV V VI VII VIII (^3) Li lithium 7 (^4) Be beryllium 9 atomic number atomic symbol **Key**^ name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mg magnesium 24 19 K potassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rb rubidium 85 (^38) Sr strontium 88 (^55) Cs caesium^133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Fr francium 

- 

(^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium^204 (^6) C carbon^1214 Sisilicon^2832 Gegermanium^7350 Sntin^11982 Pblead^207 (^22) Ti titanium (^4840) Zr zirconium (^9172) Hf hafnium^178104 Rf rutherfordium 

- 

 23 V vanadium 

(^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Ta tantalum^181105 Dbdubnium 

- 

(^24) Cr chromium (^5242) Mo molybdenum (^9674) W tungsten^184106 Sgseaborgium 

- 

(^25) Mn manganese (^5543) Tc technetium – (^75) Re rhenium^186107 Bhbohrium 

- 

(^26) Feiron (^5644) Ru ruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rh rhodium^103 (^77) Ir iridium (^192109) Mt meitnerium 

- 

(^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pd palladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Ds darmstadtium 

- 

(^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rg roentgenium 

- 

(^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cd cadmium^112 (^80) Hg mercury^201112 Cncopernicium 

- 

 114 F 

 l flerovium 

- 

(^116) Lv livermorium 

- 

(^7) N nitrogen 1415 P phosphorus (^3133) Asarsenic (^7551) Sb antimony 12283 Bibismuth 209 (^8) O oxygen^1616 Ssulfur^3234 Seselenium^7952 Tetellurium^12884 Popolonium 

- 

(^9) F fluorine^1917 C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Br bromine 8053 I iodine 12785 At astatine 

- 

(^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Sc scandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71 lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) La lanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). actinium 

- 

(^58) Cecerium (^14090) Th thorium^232 (^59) Pr praseodymium (^14191) Pa protactinium 231 (^60) Nd neodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pm promethium – (^93) Np neptunium 

- 

(^62) Sm samarium (^15094) Pu plutonium 

- 

(^63) Eu europium (^15295) Am americium 

- 

(^64) Gd gadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bk berkelium 

- 

(^66) Dy dysprosium 16398 Cf californium 

- 

(^67) Ho holmium^165 (^99) Es einsteinium 

- 

(^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Md mendelevium 

- 

(^70) Yb ytterbium^173102 Nonobelium 

- 

(^71) Lu lutetium^175103 Lrlawrencium 

- 


