 This document has 16 pages. Blank pages are indicated. 

IB20 06_0620_22/2RP© UCLES 2020 (^) **[Turn over** 

## *8601179553* 

# Cambridge IGCSE ™ 

### CHEMISTRY 0620/22 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) May/June 2020 45 minutes You must answer on the multiple choice answer sheet. You will need: Multiple choice answer sheetSoft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) INSTRUCTIONS 

- There are **forty** questions on this paper. Answer **all** questions. 

- For each question there are four possible answersand record your choice in soft pencil on the multiple choice answer sheet. **A** , **B** , **C** and **D**. Choose the **one** you consider correct 

- Follow the instructions on the multiple choice answer sheet. 

- Write in soft pencil. 

- Write your name, centre number and candidate number on the multiple choice answer sheet in thespaces provided unless this has been done for you. 

- Do **not** use correction fluid. 

- Do **not** write on any bar codes. 

- You may use a calculator. **INFORMATION** 

- The total mark for this paper is 40. 

- Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. 

- Any rough working should be done on this question paper. 

- The Periodic Table is printed in the question paper. 


© UCLES 2020 0620/22/M/J/20 

**1** A mixture of ice and water is left to stand and the ice melts. Which row describes what happens as the ice is melting? temperature of mixture energy changes **A** increases average kinetic energy of particles increases **B** increases energy is used to overcome attractive forces **C** stays the same average kinetic energy of particles increases **D** stays the same energy is used to overcome attractive forces 

**2** Which piece of apparatus is used to measure 25.0 cm^3 of aqueous sodium hydroxide? **A B C D** 

**3** Paper chromatography is used to determine the _R_ f values for four different food colourings. Which food colouring has an _R_ f value of 0.6? 

 25 20 15 10 5 0 

 solvent front 

 baseline A B C D 

 distance / cm 


© UCLES 2020 0620/22/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**4** The diagram shows the electronic structure of a particle with a nucleon number (mass number) of40. 

 e 

 e 

 e e e e 

 e ee 

 ee ee ee ee 

 e 

 40 

 The table shows the suggestions that three students, 1, 2 and 3, made to identify the particle. student 1 2 3 particle Ar C l Ca 2+ Which students are correct? A 1 and 2 only B 1 and 3 only C 2 and 3 only D 1, 2 and 3 

**5** The electronic structures of two atoms, P and Q, are shown. 

### P Q 

 P and Q combine together to form a compound. What is the type of bonding in the compound and what is the formula of the compound? type of bonding formula A ionic PQ 

**B** ionic PQ (^2) **C** covalent PQ 2 **D** covalent PQ 


© UCLES 2020 0620/22/M/J/20 

**6** Which statement about the structure of a metal explains why metals are malleable? **A** The electrons can move freely throughout the lattice. **B** The layers of metal ions can slide over each other. **C** The metal ions are positively charged. **D** There is a strong force of attraction between the metal ions and the electrons. 

**7** The bonding, structure and melting point of sodium chloride and sulfur dichloride are shown. 

compound bonding structure (^) melting point / °C sodium chloride ionic giant lattice 801 sulfur dichloride covalent simple molecular –121 Why does sulfur dichloride have a lower melting point than sodium chloride? **A** The covalent bonds in sulfur dichloride are weaker than the attractive forces between molecules in sodium chloride. **B** The covalent bonds in sulfur dichloride are weaker than the ionic bonds in sodium chloride. **C** The attractive forces between molecules in sulfur dichloride are weaker than the attractive forces between molecules in sodium chloride. **D** The attractive forces between molecules in sulfur dichloride are weaker than the ionic bonds in sodium chloride. 

## 8 Lead(II) nitrate, Pb(NO 3 ) 2 , reacts with potassium iodide, KI, to form a yellow precipitate, PbI 2 , 

 and a soluble salt, KNO 3. What is the equation for the reaction? A Pb(NO 3 ) 2 + KI → PbI 2 + KNO 3 B Pb(NO 3 ) 2 + 2KI → PbI 2 + KNO 3 C 2Pb(NO 3 ) 2 + 2KI → PbI 2 + 2KNO 3 D Pb(NO 3 ) 2 + 2KI → PbI 2 + 2KNO 3 

**9** The Haber process is a reversible reaction. N 2 (g) + 3H 2 (g) 2NH 3 (g) The reaction has a 30% yield of ammonia. Which volume of ammonia gas, NHby reacting 0.75 moles of hydrogen with excess nitrogen? 3 , measured at room temperature and pressure, is obtained **A** 3600 cm^3 **B** 5400 cm^3 **C** 12 000 cm^3 **D** 18 000 cm^3 


© UCLES 2020 0620/22/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**10** Electrolytes can be broken down by electrolysis. Which rows are correct for each electrolyte? 

electrolyte (^) at cathodereaction at anodeproduct 1 dilute aqueous sodium chloride 2H +^ + 2e –^ → H 2 oxygen 2 concentrated hydrochloric acid 2H +^ + 2e –^ → H 2 chlorine 3 molten aluminium oxide 2O 2–^ → O 2 + 4e –^ aluminium 4 concentrated aqueous sodium bromide Na +^ + e –^ → Na bromine **A** 1 and 2 **B** 1 and 4 **C** 2 and 3 **D** 3 and 4 

## 11 The electrolysis of aqueous copper(II) sulfate, using inert electrodes, is shown. 

## aqueous copper(II) sulfate 

### + – 

 Which statement about a reaction at an electrode is correct? A Copper ions gain electrons at the negative electrode. B Copper ions gain electrons at the positive electrode. C Hydrogen ions gain electrons at the negative electrode. D Hydrogen ions gain electrons at the positive electrode. 


© UCLES 2020 0620/22/M/J/20 

**12** Methane burns in excess oxygen. The equation is shown. CH 4 (g) + 2O 2 (g) → CO 2 (g) + 2H 2 O(g) Bond energies are shown. bond bond energy/ kJ mol –1 C=O 805 C–H 410 O=O 496 O–H 460 What is the energy change for the reaction? **A** (4 × 410 + 2 × 496) – (2 × 805 + 4 × 460) **B** (2 × 805 + 2 × 460) – (410 + 2 × 496) **C** (410 + 2 × 496) – (805 + 2 × 460) **D** (410 + 496) – (805 + 460) 

**13** Which statements about hydrogen fuel cells are correct? 1 Water is formed as the only waste product. 2 Both water and carbon dioxide are formed as waste products. 3 The overall reaction is 2H 2 + O 2 → 2H 2 O. 4 The overall reaction is endothermic. **A** 1 and 3 **B** 1 and 4 **C** 2 and 3 **D** 2 and 4 

**14** Which list contains **only** chemical changes? **A** melting, evaporating, dissolving **B** rusting, freezing, subliming **C** neutralisation, polymerisation, combustion **D** boiling, condensing, distillation 


© UCLES 2020 0620/22/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**15** The results of adding excess marble chips (calcium carbonate) to hydrochloric acid at 50 °C and at 30 °C are shown. Only the temperature is changed. 

 volume of carbon dioxide given off / cm 3 

(^0) time / s 

### 0 

### 50 °C 

### 30 °C 

 Which row describes the reacting particles at 30 °C compared to those at 50 °C? collision rate collision energy A higher higher B higher lower C lower higher D lower lower 

**16** Methane reacts with steam and an equilibrium is reached. CH 4 (g) + H 2 O(g) CO(g) + 3H 2 (g) The forward reaction is endothermic. Which row shows how the amount of hydrogen at equilibrium changes when the pressure or temperature is changed as indicated? change in temperature 

 change in pressure 

 amount of hydrogen A decrease no change increase B increase no change decrease C no change increase decrease D no change decrease decrease 


© UCLES 2020 0620/22/M/J/20 

## 17 When aqueous iron(III) chloride is added to aqueous potassium iodide a chemical reaction 

 occurs and iodine is formed. Which statement is correct? A Iodide ions are oxidised, they gain electrons in this reaction. B Iodide ions are oxidised, they lose electrons in this reaction. 

## C Iron(III) chloride is oxidised in this reaction. 

## D Neither iodide ions nor iron(III) chloride is oxidised in this reaction. 

**18** The graph shows how the pH of a solution changes as an acid is added to an alkali. 

 acid + alkali → salt + water Which letter represents the area of the graph where both acid and salt are present? 

 pH 

**A** (^) **B C** 

### D 

### 14 

### 7 

(^0) volume of acid added **19** Which statement describes a weak acid? **A** It is a proton acceptor and is fully ionised in aqueous solution. **B** It is a proton acceptor and is partially ionised in aqueous solution. **C** It is a proton donor and is fully ionised in aqueous solution. **D** It is a proton donor and is partially ionised in aqueous solution. 


© UCLES 2020 0620/22/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

## 20 The apparatus shown is used to prepare aqueous copper(II) sulfate. 

### Y 

 solid X 

 aqueous 

## copper(II) sulfate 

 excess of solid X 

 filter paper 

 heat 

 stirrer 

 What are X and Y? X Y 

## A copper aqueous iron(II) sulfate 

## B copper(II) chloride dilute sulfuric acid 

## C copper(II) oxide dilute sulfuric acid 

## D sulfur aqueous copper(II) chloride 

**21** Which process is **not** used in the preparation of an insoluble salt? **A** filtration **B** washing **C** crystallisation **D** drying 

**22** Which statement about Group I and Group VII elements is correct? **A** Group VII elements are monoatomic non-metals. **B** Lithium is more reactive with water than caesium. **C** The melting points of Group I metals increase down the group. **D** Potassium bromide reacts with chlorine to produce an orange solution. 


© UCLES 2020 0620/22/M/J/20 

**23** The properties of the element titanium, Ti, can be predicted from its position in the Periodic Table. Which row identifies the properties of titanium? can be used as a catalyst 

 conducts electricity when solid has low density^ 

 forms coloured compounds A     B     C     D     

**24** Which diagram shows a mixture of noble gases? **A B C D** 

**25** Which property is shown by **all** metals? **A** They are extracted from their ores by heating with carbon. **B** They conduct electricity. **C** They form acidic oxides. **D** They react with hydrochloric acid to form hydrogen. 

**26** Many metal carbonates decompose when they are heated. Which row describes what happens when potassium carbonate, calcium carbonate and 

## copper(II) carbonate are heated using a Bunsen burner? 

 decomposes easily decomposeswith difficulty does not decompose atBunsen temperatures 

## A calcium carbonate copper(II) carbonate potassium carbonate 

## B copper(II) carbonate calcium carbonate potassium carbonate 

## C copper(II) carbonate potassium carbonate calcium carbonate 

## D potassium carbonate calcium carbonate copper(II) carbonate 


© UCLES 2020 0620/22/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**27** Molten iron from the blast furnace contains impurities. The process of turning the impure iron into steel involves blowing oxygen into the molten iron and adding calcium oxide. What are the reasons for blowing in oxygen and adding calcium oxide? blowing in oxygen adding calcium oxide **A** carbon is removed by reacting with oxygen reacts with acidic impurities making slag **B** carbon is removed by reacting with oxygen reacts with slag and so removes it **C** iron reacts with the oxygen reacts with acidic impurities making slag **D** iron reacts with the oxygen reacts with slag and so removes it 

**28** Four iron nails are added to four different metal sulfate solutions. In which solution does a displacement reaction occur? 

## A copper(II) sulfate 

 B magnesium sulfate C sodium sulfate D zinc sulfate 

**29** Which statement about pure water is **not** correct? **A** It condenses at 100 °C. **B** It freezes at 0 °C. 

## C It turns cobalt(II) chloride paper blue. 

## D It turns anhydrous copper(II) sulfate blue. 


© UCLES 2020 0620/22/M/J/20 

**30** Three processes in the carbon cycle are shown. 1 Methane reacts with oxygen producing carbon dioxide and water. 2 Carbon dioxide and water are absorbed and used by plants to make oxygen. 3 Oxygen is used by living things to release energy. Which processes have taken place? 1 2 3 **A** combustion photosynthesis respiration **B** combustion respiration photosynthesis **C** photosynthesis combustion respiration **D** respiration photosynthesis combustion 

**31** In the Haber process, nitrogen and hydrogen are reacted to make ammonia. N 2 (g) + 3H 2 (g) 2NH 3 (g) The forward reaction is exothermic. Which conditions produce the maximum yield of ammonia? pressure temperature **A** high high **B** high low **C** low high **D** low low 

**32** Which process, used to prevent iron from rusting, involves sacrificial protection? **A** alloying **B** electroplating **C** galvanising **D** painting 


© UCLES 2020 0620/22/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**33** A student suggests three uses of calcium carbonate (limestone). 1 manufacture of cement 2 manufacture of iron 3 treating alkaline soils Which suggestions are correct? **A** 1 and 2 only **B** 1 and 3 only **C** 2 and 3 only **D** 1, 2 and 3 

**34** One of the reactions used in the manufacture of sulfuric acid is shown. 2SO 2 + O 2 2SO 3 Which catalyst is used to increase the rate of this reaction? **A** iron 

## B manganese(IV) oxide 

## C vanadium(V) oxide 

 D nickel 

**35** Ethanol is made on an industrial scale by the fermentation of sugars or by the reaction of ethene with steam in the presence of a suitable catalyst. What is a **disadvantage** of making ethanol from ethene rather than by fermentation? **A** A continuous production process is used. **B** A non-renewable raw material is used. **C** The product is very pure. **D** The rate of reaction is very high. 

**36** Which statement about compounds in the same homologous series is correct? **A** They have the same chemical properties because they have the same number of carbonatoms. **B** They have the same physical properties because they have the same number of carbon atoms. **C** They have different chemical properties because they have different numbers of carbon atoms. **D** They have different physical properties because they have different numbers of carbonatoms. 


© UCLES 2020 0620/22/M/J/20 

**37** Increasing the number of atoms in one molecule of a hydrocarbon increases the amount ofenergy released when it burns. 

 What is the correct order? less energyreleased more energyreleased A ethene ethane methane B ethene methane ethane C methane ethane ethene D methane ethene ethane 

**38** An organic compound, P, reacts with zinc to produce a gas, Q. What are P and Q? P Q **A** ethanoic acid carbon dioxide **B** ethanoic acid hydrogen **C** ethanol carbon dioxide **D** ethanol hydrogen 

**39** Alkanes undergo substitution reactions in the presence of UV light. Which equation represents a substitution reaction of ethane? 

**A** C 2 H 6 + C _l_ (^) 2 → C 2 H 4 + 2HC _l_ **B** C 2 H 6 + C _l_ (^) 2 → C 2 H 5 C _l_ + HC _l_ **C** C 2 H 6 + C _l_ (^) 2 → C 2 H 4 C _l_ (^) 2 + H 2 **D** C 2 H 6 + HC _l_ → C 2 H 5 C _l_ + H 2 **40** Which substances are natural polymers? 1 proteins 2 carbohydrates 3 nylon 4 poly(ethene) **A** 1 and 2 **B** 1 and 3 **C** 2 and 3 **D** 3 and 4 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeAssessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University ofCambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2020 0620/22/M/J/20 

### BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2020 0620/22/M/J/20 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements^1 Hhydrogen^1 

(^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Beberyllium 9 **Key** atomic numberatomic symbol name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mgmagnesium 24 19 Kpotassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Srstrontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Gegermanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 (^22) Tititanium (^4840) Zrzirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rfrutherfordium– 23 Vvanadium (^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Crchromium (^5242) Momolybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sgseaborgium– (^25) Mnmanganese (^5543) Tctechnetium– (^75) Rerhenium (^186107) Bhbohrium– (^26) Feiron (^5644) Ruruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Ir iridium (^192109) Mtmeitnerium– (^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pdpalladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Dsdarmstadtium– (^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rgroentgenium– (^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cdcadmium (^11280) Hgmercury (^201112) Cncopernicium– 114 F _l_ flerovium– (^116) Lvlivermorium– (^7) Nnitrogen 1415 Pphosphorus (^3133) Asarsenic (^7551) Sbantimony 12283 Bibismuth 209 (^8) Ooxygen 1616 Ssulfur (^3234) Seselenium (^7952) Tetellurium (^12884) Popolonium– (^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Brbromine 8053 I iodine 12785 Atastatine– (^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Scscandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) Lalanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). actinium– (^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium^141 (^91) Paprotactinium 231 (^60) Ndneodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pmpromethium– (^93) Npneptunium– (^62) Smsamarium (^15094) Puplutonium– (^63) Eueuropium (^15295) Amamericium– (^64) Gdgadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bkberkelium– (^66) Dydysprosium 16398 Cfcalifornium– (^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Eseinsteinium– (^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Mdmendelevium– (^70) Ybytterbium (^173102) Nonobelium– (^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lrlawrencium– 


