 This syllabus is regulated for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 13 printed pages and 3 blank pages. IB19 11_0620_21/3RP© UCLES 2019 [Turn over 

# *8533346900* 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/21 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) October/November 2019 Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet^ 45 minutes Soft clean eraserSoft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil.Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unlessthis has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

There areanswers **A** (^) , **forty B** , **C** questions on this paper. Answerand **D**. **all** questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the **one** you consider correct and record your choice in **soft pencil** on the separate Answer Sheet. **Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully.** Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer.Any rough working should be done in this booklet. A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16.Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/21/O/N/19 

**1** Samples of four gases are released in a room at the same time. The gases are carbon dioxide, CO 2 , hydrogen chloride, HC _l_ , hydrogen sulfide, H 2 S, and nitrogen dioxide, NO 2. Which gas diffuses fastest? **A** carbon dioxide **B** hydrogen chloride **C** hydrogen sulfide **D** nitrogen dioxide 

**2** A student is asked to measure the time taken for 0.4completely with 25.0 cm (^3) of dilute hydrochloric acid. g of magnesium carbonate to react Which pieces of apparatus does the student need? **A** balance, stop-clock, pipette **B** balance, stop-clock, thermometer **C** balance, pipette, thermometer **D** stop-clock, pipette, thermometer **3** Four different food colourings are analysed using chromatography. The results are shown on the chromatogram. The diagram is not drawn to scale. Which food colouring contains a component with an _R_ f value of 0.3? 10 cm 8 cm 6 cm 4 cm 2 cm solvent front baseline **A B C D** 


© UCLES 2019 0620/21/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**4** Which statement about an ionic compound is **not** correct? **A** It conducts electricity when dissolved in water. **B** It has a high melting point due to strong attractive forces between ions. **C** It has a regular lattice of oppositely charged ions in a ‘sea of electrons’. **D** The ionic bonds are formed between metallic and non-metallic elements. 

# 5 An isotope of chromium is represented by 5224 Cr. 

 Which statement about an atom of this isotope of chromium is correct? A It contains 24 electrons. B It contains 24 neutrons. C It contains 28 protons. D It contains 52 neutrons. 

**6** Element X has two isotopes, 126 Xand 146 X. 

 Which statement about these isotopes is correct? A They have different chemical properties because they have different numbers of neutrons. B They have the same chemical properties because they have the same number of outer shell electrons. C They have the same nucleon number because the sum of the number of protons and electrons is the same. D They have different positions in the Periodic Table because they have different numbers ofneutrons. 

# 7 How are the structures of diamond and silicon( IV) oxide similar? 

# A Molecules of both diamond and silicon( IV) oxide are held together by weak attractive forces. 

 B They both contain atoms arranged in planes held together by weak bonds. C They both contain ions that are free to move. 

# D The carbon in diamond and the silicon in silicon( IV) oxide each have four covalent bonds. 

**8** Which statement describes the structure of copper? **A** It has a lattice of negative ions in a ‘sea of electrons’. **B** It has a lattice of negative ions in a ‘sea of protons’. **C** It has a lattice of positive ions in a ‘sea of electrons’. **D** It has a lattice of positive ions in a ‘sea of protons’. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/21/O/N/19 

**9** Four fertilisers are each supplied in 100 kg bags. Which fertiliser supplies the greatest mass of nitrogen per 100 kg bag? **A** ammonium nitrate, NH 4 NO 3 **B** ammonium phosphate, (NH 4 ) 3 PO 4 **C** ammonium sulfate, (NH 4 ) 2 SO 4 

**D** urea, CO(NH 2 ) (^2) **10** Calcium carbonate reacts with dilute hydrochloric acid. The equation for the reaction is shown. CaCO 3 + 2HC _l_ → CaC _l_ (^) 2 + H 2 O + CO 2 1.00 g of calcium carbonate is added to 50.0 cm^3 of 0.0500 mol / dm^3 hydrochloric acid. Which volume of carbon dioxide is made in this reaction? **A** 30 cm^3 **B** 60 cm^3 **C** 120 cm^3 **D** 240 cm^3 **11** Which rows correctly show cathode and anode products from the electrolysis of the named electrolyte? electrolyte cathode product anode product 

# 1 copper( II ) sulfate solution 

 using copper electrodes 

 copper oxygen 

# 2 molten lead( II ) bromide lead bromine 

 3 dilute sodium bromide solution hydrogen oxygen 

# 4 copper( II ) sulfate solution 

 using carbon electrodes 

 hydrogen oxygen 

 A 1 and 2 only B 1 and 4 only C 2 and 3 only D 3 and 4 only 

**12** What are the ionic half-equations for the electrode reactions during the electrolysis of concentrated aqueous sodium chloride? anode cathode 

**A** C _l_ (^) 2 + 2e –^ → 2C _l_ –^ H 2 → 2H+^ + 2e – **B** 2C _l_ –^ → C _l_ (^) 2 + 2e –^ 2H+^ + 2e –^ → H 2 **C** H 2 → 2H+^ + 2e –^ C _l_ (^) 2 + 2e –^ → 2C _l_ – **D** 2H+^ + 2e –^ → H 2 2C _l_ –^ → C _l_ (^) 2 + 2e – 


© UCLES 2019 0620/21/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**13** Which statements about endothermic reactions are correct? 1 The energy of the products is greater than the energy of the reactants. 2 The energy of the reactants is greater than the energy of the products. 3 The temperature of the surroundings increases during the reaction. 4 The temperature of the surroundings decreases during the reaction. **A** 1 and 3 only **B** 1 and 4 only **C** 2 and 3 only **D** 2 and 4 only 

**14** Which gases are used to generate electricity in a fuel cell? **A** carbon dioxide and oxygen **B** hydrogen and methane **C** hydrogen and oxygen **D** methane and carbon dioxide 

**15** Which is a chemical change? **A** boiling water **B** cooking an egg **C** dissolving sugar **D** melting ice cubes 

**16** The rate of reaction between magnesium and dilute hydrochloric acid is increased by increasing the concentration of the acid. How does this affect the reacting particles? collision rate of particles proportion of particles withsufficient energy to react **A** increases increases **B** increases stays the same **C** stays the same increases **D** stays the same stays the same 


© UCLES 2019 0620/21/O/N/19 

**17** Dinitrogen tetroxide, N 2 O 4 , is converted into nitrogen dioxide, NO 2 , in a reversible reaction. N 2 O 4 (g) 2NO 2 (g) The forward reaction is endothermic. Which conditions give the highest equilibrium yield of nitrogen dioxide? 

 / atmospherespressure temperature A 2 high B 2 low C 50 high D 50 low 

# 18 The equation for the reaction between iron(II) sulfate and bromine is shown. 

6FeSO 4 + 3Br 2 → 2Fe 2 (SO 4 ) 3 + 2FeBr (^3) Which row identifies the oxidising agent and the reducing agent? oxidising agent reducing agent **A** Br 2 FeSO 4 **B** FeSO 4 Br (^2) **C** FeBr 3 Fe 2 (SO 4 ) (^3) **D** Fe 2 (SO 4 ) 3 FeBr (^3) **19** Which statement about amphoteric oxides is correct? **A** They are made by combining an acidic oxide with a basic oxide. **B** They react with water to give a solution of pH 7. **C** They react with both acids and bases. **D** They do not react with acids or bases. **20** Carbonic acid is a weak acid formed when carbon dioxide dissolves in water. What is the pH of the solution? **A** 1 **B** 5 **C** 7 **D** 9 


© UCLES 2019 0620/21/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

# 21 A method used to make copper(II) sulfate crystals is shown. 

 1 Place dilute sulfuric acid in a beaker. 2 Warm the acid. 

# 3 Add copper(II) oxide until it is in excess. 

 4 Filter the mixture. 5 Evaporate the filtrate until crystals start to form. 6 Leave the filtrate to cool. What are the purposes of step 3 and step 4? step 3 step 4 

# A to ensure all of the acid has reacted to obtain solid copper(II) sulfate 

# B to ensure all of the acid has reacted to remove the excess of copper(II) oxide 

# C to speed up the reaction to obtain solid copper(II) sulfate 

# D to speed up the reaction to remove the excess of copper(II) oxide 

# 22 Lead( II ) sulfate is an insoluble salt. 

 Which process is not used to prepare a pure sample of this salt? A crystallisation B drying C filtration D precipitation 

**23** Part of the Periodic Table is shown. Which element is used to provide an inert atmosphere? **A B C D** 


© UCLES 2019 0620/21/O/N/19 

**24** Which pair of elements reacts together most violently? **A** chlorine and lithium **B** chlorine and potassium **C** iodine and lithium **D** iodine and potassium 

**25** Which pair of compounds shows that transition elements have variable oxidation states? 

**A** Cr 2 O 3 and CrBr (^3) **B** CuSO 4 and CuC _l_ (^) 2 **C** Fe 2 O 3 and FeC _l_ (^) 2 **D** NiO and NiC _l_ (^) 2 **26** Some properties of substance X are listed. ● It conducts electricity when molten. ● It has a high melting point. ● It burns in oxygen and the oxide dissolves in water to give a solution with pH 11. What is X? **A** a covalent compound **B** a macromolecule **C** a metal **D** an ionic compound **27** Which statement is correct? **A** Aluminium is used in the manufacture of aircraft because it has a high density. **B** Copper is used for cooking utensils because it is a good conductor of heat. **C** Mild steel is used for car bodies because it is resistant to corrosion. **D** Stainless steel is used for cutlery because it is a conductor of electricity. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/21/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**28** Iron rusts but aluminium does not easily corrode. Which statement explains why aluminium does **not** easily corrode? **A** It is an alloy. **B** It is below iron in the reactivity series. **C** It is not a transition element. **D** Its surface is protected by an oxide layer. 

**29** Which statement about the extraction of aluminium is correct? **A** Aluminium is formed at the cathode during the electrolysis of aluminium oxide. **B** Hematite is mainly aluminium oxide. **C** Molten cryolite is used to raise the melting point of the aluminium oxide. **D** Oxygen gains electrons at the anode during the electrolysis of aluminium oxide. 

**30** River water contains soluble impurities, insoluble impurities and bacteria. River water is made safe to drink by filtration and chlorination. Which statement is correct? **A** Filtration removes bacteria and insoluble impurities, and chlorination removes soluble impurities. **B** Filtration removes insoluble impurities, and chlorination kills the bacteria. **C** Filtration removes soluble and insoluble impurities, and chlorination kills the bacteria. **D** Filtrationimpurities. removes soluble impurities and bacteria, and chlorination removes insoluble 

**31** Which physical property is used to separate the nitrogen and oxygen from air? **A** boiling point **B** density **C** electrical conductivity **D** molecular mass 


© UCLES 2019 0620/21/O/N/19 

**32** The apparatus shown is set up and left for a week. damp iron wool air 

 water Which diagram shows the level of the water at the end of the week? A B C D 

**33** Which statement about the carbon cycle is correct? **A** Carbon is absorbed from the atmosphere by combustion and released into it by respiration. **B** Carbon is absorbed from the atmosphere by photosynthesis and released into it by combustion. **C** Carbon is absorbed from the atmosphere by both respiration and combustion. **D** Carbon is released into the atmosphere by both photosynthesis and respiration. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/21/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**34** Ammonium sulfate is used as a fertiliser. It is made from ammonia and sulfuric acid. Which words complete gaps 1, 2 and 3? The ......1...... is made by the ......2...... process in which ......3...... is used as a catalyst. 1 2 3 **A** ammonia Contact iron 

# B ammonia Haber vanadium(V) oxide 

# C sulfuric acid Contact vanadium(V) oxide 

 D sulfuric acid Haber iron 

**35** Which process is used to obtain lime from limestone? **A** cracking **B** fractional distillation **C** neutralisation **D** thermal decomposition 

**36** Petroleum is separated by fractional distillation. Which statement about the fractions produced is correct? **A** Bottled gas for heating and cooking is obtained from the naphtha fraction. **B** Diesel oil is used as a fuel for jet aircraft. **C** Substances used to make polishes are obtained from the lubricating fraction. **D** The kerosene fraction contains many useful waxes. 

**37** Which products are obtained by the cracking of an alkane? 

 alkene hydrogen water A    B    C    D    


© UCLES 2019 0620/21/O/N/19 

**38** Ethanol is manufactured by the catalytic addition of steam to ethene and by fermentation. Which statement describes an advantage of fermentation compared to the catalytic addition of steam to ethene? **A** Fermentation is a more rapid reaction. **B** Fermentation produces a purer product. **C** Fermentation uses a higher temperature. **D** Fermentation uses renewable resources. 

**39** The diagram shows the structure of a monomer and of the polymer made from it. 

 n 

 n 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

 What are the monomer and polymer? monomer polymer A ethane poly(ethane) B ethane poly(ethene) C ethene poly(ethane) D ethene poly(ethene) 

**40** Which polymers possess the same linkage? **A** nylon and protein **B** protein and starch **C** starch and nylon **D** nylon and _Terylene_ 


© UCLES 2019 0620/21/O/N/19 

## BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2019 0620/21/O/N/19 

## BLANK PAGE 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeAssessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University ofCambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2019 0620/21/O/N/19 

## BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2019 0620/21/O/N/19 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements^1 Hhydrogen^1 

(^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Beberyllium 9 **Key** atomic numberatomic symbol name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mgmagnesium 24 19 Kpotassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Srstrontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Gegermanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 (^22) Tititanium (^4840) Zrzirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rfrutherfordium– 23 Vvanadium (^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Crchromium (^5242) Momolybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sgseaborgium– (^25) Mnmanganese (^5543) Tctechnetium– (^75) Rerhenium (^186107) Bhbohrium– (^26) Feiron (^5644) Ruruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Ir iridium (^192109) Mtmeitnerium– (^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pdpalladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Dsdarmstadtium– (^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rgroentgenium– (^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cdcadmium (^11280) Hgmercury (^201112) Cncopernicium– 114 F _l_ flerovium– (^116) Lvlivermorium– (^7) Nnitrogen 1415 Pphosphorus (^3133) Asarsenic (^7551) Sbantimony 12283 Bibismuth 209 (^8) Ooxygen 1616 Ssulfur (^3234) Seselenium (^7952) Tetellurium (^12884) Popolonium– (^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Brbromine 8053 I iodine 12785 Atastatine– (^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Scscandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) Lalanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). actinium– (^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium^141 (^91) Paprotactinium 231 (^60) Ndneodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pmpromethium– (^93) Npneptunium– (^62) Smsamarium (^15094) Puplutonium– (^63) Eueuropium (^15295) Amamericium– (^64) Gdgadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bkberkelium– (^66) Dydysprosium 16398 Cfcalifornium– (^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Eseinsteinium– (^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Mdmendelevium– (^70) Ybytterbium (^173102) Nonobelium– (^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lrlawrencium– 


