 This syllabus is regulated for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. IB19 11_0620_22/4RP© UCLES 2019 [Turn over 

# *8743391895* 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/22 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) October/November 2019 Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet^ 45 minutes Soft clean eraserSoft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil.Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unlessthis has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

There areanswers **A** (^) , **forty B** , **C** questions on this paper. Answerand **D**. **all** questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the **one** you consider correct and record your choice in **soft pencil** on the separate Answer Sheet. **Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully.** Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer.Any rough working should be done in this booklet. A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16.Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/22/O/N/19 

**1** The rate of diffusion of a gas depends on its molecular mass and the temperature. Which combination of molecular mass and temperature gives the slowest rate of diffusion? molecular mass temperature **A** high high **B** high low **C** low high **D** low low 

**2** A student is asked to measure the time taken for 0.4completely with 25.0 cm (^3) of dilute hydrochloric acid. g of magnesium carbonate to react Which pieces of apparatus does the student need? **A** balance, stop-clock, pipette **B** balance, stop-clock, thermometer **C** balance, pipette, thermometer **D** stop-clock, pipette, thermometer **3** Substance Q was investigated using chromatography. The chromatogram is shown. The diagram is not drawn to scale. 13 mm Q 83 mm 114 mm 129 mm baseline solvent front Q What is the _R_ f value of Q? **A** 0.60 **B** 0.64 **C** 0.69 **D** 0.72 


© UCLES 2019 0620/22/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**4** Which statement about an ionic compound is **not** correct? **A** It conducts electricity when dissolved in water. **B** It has a high melting point due to strong attractive forces between ions. **C** It has a regular lattice of oppositely charged ions in a ‘sea of electrons’. **D** The ionic bonds are formed between metallic and non-metallic elements. 

**5** What is the total number of electrons in one molecule of ammonia, NH 3? **A** 6 **B** 8 **C** 10 **D** 11 

# 6 Rubidium has two isotopes, 8537 Rb and 8737 Rb. 

 Which statement explains why both isotopes have the same chemical properties? A They have the same number of protons. B They have the same number of outer shell electrons. C They have different numbers of neutrons. D They have different mass numbers. 

# 7 Which statement about the structure and properties of silicon(IV) oxide is not correct? 

 A It has a giant structure similar to that of diamond. B It has a high melting point due to the strong attractive force between molecules. C There are strong covalent bonds between silicon and oxygen. 

# D There are no free electrons, so silicon( IV) oxide does not conduct electricity. 

**8** Which statement describes the structure of copper? **A** It has a lattice of negative ions in a ‘sea of electrons’. **B** It has a lattice of negative ions in a ‘sea of protons’. **C** It has a lattice of positive ions in a ‘sea of electrons’. **D** It has a lattice of positive ions in a ‘sea of protons’. 

# 9 Phosphorus reacts with oxygen to form phosphorus(III) oxide as shown. 

 4P(s) + 3O 2 (g) → 2P 2 O 3 (s) 

# Which mass of phosphorus(III) oxide is produced from 6.2 g of phosphorus? 

 A 1.1 g B 5.5 g C 11.0 g D 22.0 g 


© UCLES 2019 0620/22/O/N/19 

**10** Calcium carbonate is heated. Calcium oxide and carbon dioxide gas are formed. The equation for the reaction is shown. 

CaCO 3 → CaO + CO (^2) 225 kg of calcium carbonate is heated until there is no further change in mass. The yield of calcium oxide is 85 kg. What is the percentage yield? **A** 37.8% **B** 47.2% **C** 67.5% **D** 85.0% **11** The diagram shows a simple cell. dilute sulfuric acid metal P metal Q wire voltmeter Which pair of metals produces the largest voltage? metal P metal Q **A** magnesium iron **B** magnesium copper **C** zinc iron **D** zinc copper **12** What are the ionic half-equations for the electrode reactions during the electrolysis of concentrated aqueous sodium chloride? anode cathode **A** C _l_ (^) 2 + 2e –^ → 2C _l_ –^ H 2 → 2H+^ + 2e – **B** 2C _l_ –^ → C _l_ (^) 2 + 2e –^ 2H+^ + 2e –^ → H 2 **C** H 2 → 2H+^ + 2e –^ C _l_ (^) 2 + 2e –^ → 2C _l_ – **D** 2H+^ + 2e –^ → H 2 2C _l_ –^ → C _l_ (^) 2 + 2e – 


© UCLES 2019 0620/22/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**13** The temperature of the water in two beakers, X and Y, is measured as 21.5 °C. 

 5 g of sodium chloride is dissolved in the water in beaker X. The temperature changes to 18.0 °C. 5 g of calcium oxide is dissolved in the water in beaker Y. The temperature changes to 29.4 °C. Which types of process are occurring in beakers X and Y? X Y A endothermic endothermic B endothermic exothermic C exothermic endothermic D exothermic exothermic 

**14** Which gases are used to generate electricity in a fuel cell? **A** carbon dioxide and oxygen **B** hydrogen and methane **C** hydrogen and oxygen **D** methane and carbon dioxide 

**15** Which row identifies a chemical and a physical change? 

 chemical change physical change A boiling ethanol burning ethanol B burning ethanol evaporating ethanol C dissolving ethanol in water burning ethanol D evaporating ethanol dissolving ethanol in water 


© UCLES 2019 0620/22/O/N/19 

**16** A sample of dilute nitric acid is added to lumps of limestone in a conical flask. The conical flask isplaced on a balance and the loss in mass is measured. 

 Aconditions are kept the same. second sample of nitric acid of a different concentration is separately tested. All other The loss in mass in 1 minute at each concentration of nitric acid is shown. concentrationin mol / dm 3 loss in mass in1 minute / g 0.5 0.15 1.0 0.25 Which row describes and explains the results obtained using 1.0 mol / dm^3 nitric acid compared with 0.5 mol / dm^3 nitric acid? description explanation A decrease in reaction rate decrease in particle collision energy B decrease in reaction rate increase in particle collision rate C increase in reaction rate increase in particle collision rate D increase in reaction rate increase in particle collision rate and collision energy 

**17** When carbon monoxide reacts with hydrogen, methanol is formed. CO(g) + 2H 2 (g) CH 3 OH(g) The forward reaction is exothermic. Which statements are correct? 1 There are more moles of gas on the left-hand side of the reaction. 2 Increasing the temperature increases the amount of methanol at equilibrium. 3 Increasing the pressure increases the amount of methanol at equilibrium. 4 Increasing the initial amount of hydrogen decreases the amount of methanol atequilibrium. 

 A 1 and 2 only B 1 and 3 only C 2 and 4 only D 3 and 4 only 


© UCLES 2019 0620/22/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

# 18 In the blast furnace, iron is formed when iron( III ) oxide reacts with carbon monoxide in a redox 

 reaction. Fe 2 O 3 + 3CO → 2Fe + 3CO 2 Which substance is the oxidising agent and which substance is the reducing agent? oxidising agent reducing agent A CO Fe 2 O 3 B CO 2 Fe C Fe CO 2 D Fe 2 O 3 CO 

**19** Which oxide is classified as an amphoteric oxide? **A** aluminium oxide **B** calcium oxide 

# C copper(II) oxide 

 D nitrogen oxide 

**20** Which statement describes the properties of hydrochloric acid? **A** Carbon dioxide is produced when limestone reacts with hydrochloric acid. **B** Hydrogen is produced when sodium hydroxide reacts with hydrochloric acid. **C** Methyl orange turns yellow in strong hydrochloric acid. **D** Red litmus paper turns blue when dipped into hydrochloric acid. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/22/O/N/19 

# 21 A method used to make copper(II) sulfate crystals is shown. 

 1 Place dilute sulfuric acid in a beaker. 2 Warm the acid. 

# 3 Add copper(II) oxide until it is in excess. 

 4 Filter the mixture. 5 Evaporate the filtrate until crystals start to form. 6 Leave the filtrate to cool. What are the purposes of step 3 and step 4? step 3 step 4 

# A to ensure all of the acid has reacted to obtain solid copper(II) sulfate 

# B to ensure all of the acid has reacted to remove the excess of copper(II) oxide 

# C to speed up the reaction to obtain solid copper(II) sulfate 

# D to speed up the reaction to remove the excess of copper(II) oxide 

# 22 Lead(II) sulfate is an insoluble salt. 

# Which reaction produces a mixture from which lead(II) sulfate is obtained by filtration? 

# A adding solid lead(II) carbonate to dilute sulfuric acid 

# B adding solid lead(II) hydroxide to dilute sulfuric acid 

 C adding metallic lead to dilute sulfuric acid 

# D adding aqueous lead(II) nitrate to dilute sulfuric acid 

**23** Helium is a noble gas. Which statement about helium is correct? **A** It has eight electrons in its outer shell. **B** It is a diatomic gas. **C** It is reactive. **D** It is used for filling balloons. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/22/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**24** Which pair of elements reacts together most violently? **A** chlorine and lithium **B** chlorine and potassium **C** iodine and lithium **D** iodine and potassium 

# 25 Iron(II) ions can be oxidised to iron(III) ions by hydrogen peroxide. 

 Which statement explains why iron is a transition element? A Iron is a transition element because it can be oxidised. B Iron is a transition element because it has variable oxidation states. C Iron is a transition element because it takes part in redox reactions. D Iron is a transition element because it reacts with chlorine. 

**26** Some properties of substance X are listed. ● It conducts electricity when molten. ● It has a high melting point. ● It burns in oxygen and the oxide dissolves in water to give a solution with pH 11. What is X? **A** a covalent compound **B** a macromolecule **C** a metal **D** an ionic compound 

**27** Which row describes the uses of aluminium, copper and mild steel? 

 aluminium copper mild steel A aircraft bodies electrical wiring car bodies B car bodies cooking utensils electrical wiring C electrical wiring aircraft bodies food containers D food containers aircraft bodies cooking utensils 


© UCLES 2019 0620/22/O/N/19 

**28** The properties of four metals are listed. ● Metal W does not react with dilute hydrochloric acid. ● Metal X reacts with dilute hydrochloric acid. ● Metal Y displaces metal X from an aqueous solution of its ions. ● Metal Z reacts with water and dilute hydrochloric acid. What is the order of reactivity of the metals? most reactive 

 least reactive A W X Y Z B W Y X Z C Z X Y W D Z Y X W 

**29** Which statement about the extraction of aluminium from aluminium oxide is correct? **A** Aluminium is formed at the positive electrode during electrolysis. **B** Pure aluminium oxide is dissolved in molten cryolite. **C** Pure aluminium oxide is electrolysed using aluminium as the positive electrode. **D** Pure aluminium oxide is heated with carbon to form carbon dioxide and aluminium. 

**30** River water contains soluble impurities, insoluble impurities and bacteria. River water is made safe to drink by filtration and chlorination. Which statement is correct? **A** Filtration removes bacteria and insoluble impurities, and chlorination removes soluble impurities. **B** Filtration removes insoluble impurities, and chlorination kills the bacteria. **C** Filtration removes soluble and insoluble impurities, and chlorination kills the bacteria. **D** Filtrationimpurities. removes soluble impurities and bacteria, and chlorination removes insoluble 


© UCLES 2019 0620/22/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**31** Which process is used to separate nitrogen and oxygen from air? **A** chromatography **B** evaporation **C** filtration **D** fractional distillation 

**32** The apparatus shown is set up and left for a week. damp iron wool air 

 water Which diagram shows the level of the water at the end of the week? A B C D 


© UCLES 2019 0620/22/O/N/19 

**33** The diagram represents an outline of the carbon cycle. 

 carbon dioxide in the atmosphere 

 animals 

 organic waste 

 plants power stations 

 fossil fuels 

## X 

 death and excretion 

## Y 

 respiration 

 photosynthesis 

 Which processes are X and Y? X Y A combustion respiration B decomposition respiration C photosynthesis combustion D respiration combustion 

**34** Ammonium sulfate is used as a fertiliser. It is made from ammonia and sulfuric acid. Which words complete gaps 1, 2 and 3? The ......1...... is made by the ......2...... process in which ......3...... is used as a catalyst. 1 2 3 **A** ammonia Contact iron 

# B ammonia Haber vanadium(V) oxide 

# C sulfuric acid Contact vanadium(V) oxide 

 D sulfuric acid Haber iron 


© UCLES 2019 0620/22/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**35** Which statement about limestone and lime is correct? **A** Limestone combines with water to produce slaked lime. **B** Lime is obtained from limestone by oxidation. **C** Lime is used in the desulfurisation of flue gases. **D** Lime is used in the treatment of alkaline soil. 

**36** Some fractions obtained from petroleum are listed. 

 fraction use 

 position collected fractionating columnin the 1 gasoline waxes and polishes below refinery gas 2 bitumen making roads above kerosene 3 kerosene jet fuel below gasoline 4 refinery gas heating and cooking above gasoline Which rows are correct? A 1, 3 and 4 B 2, 3 and 4 C 3 and 4 only D 4 only 

**37** Which products are obtained by the cracking of an alkane? 

 alkene hydrogen water A    B    C    D    


© UCLES 2019 0620/22/O/N/19 

**38** Ethanol is produced by fermentation or by the reaction of ethene with steam. Which row is correct? by fermentation from ethene **A** uses a temperature of 100 °C uses a temperature of 350 °C **B** needs yeast as a catalyst does not need a catalyst **C** very slow reaction very fast reaction **D** high yield of ethanol low yield of ethanol 

**39** The diagram shows the structure of a monomer and of the polymer made from it. 

 n 

 n 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

 What are the monomer and polymer? monomer polymer A ethane poly(ethane) B ethane poly(ethene) C ethene poly(ethane) D ethene poly(ethene) 

**40** The structure of a naturally occurring polymer, X, is shown. 

 N 

## H 

## N 

## H 

## C 

## O 

## C 

## O 

## N 

## H 

## C 

## O 

 What is X? A an amino acid B a carbohydrate C a protein D a sugar 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeAssessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University ofCambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2019 0620/22/O/N/19 

## BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2019 0620/22/O/N/19 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements^1 Hhydrogen^1 

(^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Beberyllium 9 **Key** atomic numberatomic symbol name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mgmagnesium 24 19 Kpotassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Srstrontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Gegermanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 (^22) Tititanium (^4840) Zrzirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rfrutherfordium– 23 Vvanadium (^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Crchromium (^5242) Momolybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sgseaborgium– (^25) Mnmanganese (^5543) Tctechnetium– (^75) Rerhenium (^186107) Bhbohrium– (^26) Feiron (^5644) Ruruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Ir iridium (^192109) Mtmeitnerium– (^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pdpalladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Dsdarmstadtium– (^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rgroentgenium– (^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cdcadmium (^11280) Hgmercury (^201112) Cncopernicium– 114 F _l_ flerovium– (^116) Lvlivermorium– (^7) Nnitrogen 1415 Pphosphorus (^3133) Asarsenic (^7551) Sbantimony 12283 Bibismuth 209 (^8) Ooxygen 1616 Ssulfur (^3234) Seselenium (^7952) Tetellurium (^12884) Popolonium– (^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Brbromine 8053 I iodine 12785 Atastatine– (^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Scscandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) Lalanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). actinium– (^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium^141 (^91) Paprotactinium 231 (^60) Ndneodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pmpromethium– (^93) Npneptunium– (^62) Smsamarium (^15094) Puplutonium– (^63) Eueuropium (^15295) Amamericium– (^64) Gdgadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bkberkelium– (^66) Dydysprosium 16398 Cfcalifornium– (^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Eseinsteinium– (^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Mdmendelevium– (^70) Ybytterbium (^173102) Nonobelium– (^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lrlawrencium– 


