 This syllabus is regulated for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 14 printed pages and 2 blank pages. IB19 11_0620_11/3RP© UCLES 2019 [Turn over 

# *5634656915* 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/11 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) October/November 2019 Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet^ 45 minutes Soft clean eraserSoft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil.Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unlessthis has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

There areanswers **A** (^) , **forty B** , **C** questions on this paper. Answerand **D**. **all** questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the **one** you consider correct and record your choice in **soft pencil** on the separate Answer Sheet. **Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully.** Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer.Any rough working should be done in this booklet. A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16.Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/11/O/N/19 

**1** The diagram shows a cup of hot tea. 

 Which row describes the water particles in the air above the cup compared with the water particles in the cup? moving faster closer together A   B   C   D   

**2** A student is asked to measure the time taken for 0.4 g of magnesium carbonate to react completely with 25.0 cm^3 of dilute hydrochloric acid. Which pieces of apparatus does the student need? **A** balance, stop-clock, pipette **B** balance, stop-clock, thermometer **C** balance, pipette, thermometer **D** stop-clock, pipette, thermometer 

**3** A fractionating column is used to separate the hydrocarbon fractions in petroleum by fractionaldistillation. 

 Which row describes the properties of the fractions that condense at the top of the fractionatingcolumn? 

 size of molecule boiling point A large high B large low C small high D small low 


© UCLES 2019 0620/11/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**4** Some information about solid silver chloride and solid sodium chloride is shown. ● Silver chloride and sodium chloride do not dissolve in kerosene. ● Silver chloride is insoluble in water but sodium chloride is soluble in water. ● The boiling point of silver chloride is 1547 °C and the boiling point of sodium chloride is 1413 °C. Which processes are used to separate a mixture of solid silver chloride and solid sodiumchloride? **A** Add kerosene, stir and then filter. **B** Add water, stir and then filter. **C** Add water, stir and then leave to crystallise. **D** Add water, stir and then perform fractional distillation. 

**5** A covalent molecule M contains four shared pairs of electrons. What is M? **A** ammonia, NH 3 **B** hydrogen chloride, HC _l_ **C** methane, CH 4 **D** water, H 2 O 

# 6 An isotope of chromium is represented by 5224 Cr. 

 Which statement about an atom of this isotope of chromium is correct? A It contains 24 electrons. B It contains 24 neutrons. C It contains 28 protons. D It contains 52 neutrons. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/11/O/N/19 

**7** Substances P and Q both conduct electricity. P is a mixture of two different types of atom. Q is made of only one type of atom. Which row describes P and Q? P Q **A** alloy element **B** alloy compound **C** compound alloy **D** compound element 

**8** Graphite is a form of carbon. Why can graphite be used as a lubricant? **A** Graphite contains unbonded electrons which move through the structure. **B** Graphite contains weak covalent bonds so the atoms move easily. **C** Graphite has a low melting point so it easily turns into a liquid. **D** Graphite has weak attractive forces between layers so they can move. 

**9** The structure of a molecule is shown. 

 C 

## H 

## H 

## H C 

## H 

## H 

## O C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

 What is the formula of the molecule? A CHO B C 2 H 5 O C C 4 H 8 O D C 4 H 10 O 

**10** During the electrolysis of concentrated hydrochloric acid, gases are produced at both electrodes. Which statement describes the test result for the gas collected at the negative electrode? **A** It bleaches damp litmus paper. **B** It burns with a ‘pop’. **C** It relights a glowing splint. **D** It turns limewater milky. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/11/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**11** Which statements about endothermic reactions are correct? 1 The energy of the products is greater than the energy of the reactants. 2 The energy of the reactants is greater than the energy of the products. 3 The temperature of the surroundings increases during the reaction. 4 The temperature of the surroundings decreases during the reaction. **A** 1 and 3 only **B** 1 and 4 only **C** 2 and 3 only **D** 2 and 4 only 

# 12 Equations for the formation of anhydrous cobalt(II) chloride and anhydrous copper(II) sulfate are 

 shown. 

CoC _l_ (^) 2 •6H 2 O → CoC _l_ (^) 2 + 6H 2 O CuSO 4 •5H 2 O → CuSO 4 + 5H 2 O Which statement about the reactions is **not** correct? **A** Both reactions are exothermic. **B** Both reactions are reversible. 

# C Hydrated cobalt(II) chloride changes colour from pink to blue. 

# D Hydrated copper(II) sulfate changes colour from blue to white. 

**13** A method used to investigate the rate of reaction of calcium carbonate with dilute hydrochloric acid under different conditions is shown. ● Place 50 cm^3 of dilute hydrochloric acid in a conical flask. ● Add a known volume of water to the conical flask. ● Heat the conical flask to the required temperature. ● Add 1.0 g of calcium carbonate to the conical flask. ● Measure the time taken for the reaction to finish. Which volume of water and which temperature gives the shortest time taken for the reaction to finish? volume of water added / cm^3 

 temperature / °C A 10 30 B 10 50 C 40 30 D 40 50 


© UCLES 2019 0620/11/O/N/19 

**14** Which is a chemical change? **A** boiling water **B** cooking an egg **C** dissolving sugar **D** melting ice cubes 

# 15 Mercury( II) oxide, HgO, decomposes when heated. 

 The equation is shown. 2HgO → 2Hg + O 2 Why is this a reduction reaction? A The products weigh less than the reactants. B There are fewer reactants than products. C There is a gain of oxygen. D There is a loss of oxygen. 

**16** Carbonic acid is a weak acid formed when carbon dioxide dissolves in water. What is the pH of the solution? **A** 1 **B** 5 **C** 7 **D** 9 

**17** Solid X is tested as shown. 

 reaction with dilute aqueous sodiumhydroxide flame test reaction with dilutehydrochloric acid 

no reaction red flame (^) turned limewater milkygas produced which What is X? 

# A copper( II ) carbonate 

 B lithium carbonate C potassium carbonate D sodium sulfate 


© UCLES 2019 0620/11/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**18** Which oxide is basic? **A** carbon dioxide **B** sodium oxide **C** sulfur dioxide **D** water 

# 19 A method used to make copper(II) sulfate crystals is shown. 

 1 Place dilute sulfuric acid in a beaker. 2 Warm the acid. 

# 3 Add copper(II) oxide until it is in excess. 

 4 Filter the mixture. 5 Evaporate the filtrate until crystals start to form. 6 Leave the filtrate to cool. What are the purposes of step 3 and step 4? step 3 step 4 

# A to ensure all of the acid has reacted to obtain solid copper(II) sulfate 

# B to ensure all of the acid has reacted to remove the excess of copper(II) oxide 

# C to speed up the reaction to obtain solid copper(II) sulfate 

# D to speed up the reaction to remove the excess of copper(II) oxide 

**20** Which set of elements shows the change from metallic to non-metallic character across a period of the Periodic Table? **A** beryllium → magnesium → calcium **B** fluorine → bromine → iodine **C** oxygen → boron → lithium **D** sodium → silicon → chlorine 

**21** Which pair of elements reacts together most violently? **A** chlorine and lithium **B** chlorine and potassium **C** iodine and lithium **D** iodine and potassium 


© UCLES 2019 0620/11/O/N/19 

**22** What is **not** a typical property of a transition element? **A** acts as a catalyst **B** forms coloured compounds **C** has a high melting point **D** has a low density 

**23** Part of the Periodic Table is shown. Which element is used to provide an inert atmosphere? **A B C D** 

**24** Some properties of substance X are listed. ● It conducts electricity when molten. ● It has a high melting point. ● It burns in oxygen and the oxide dissolves in water to give a solution with pH 11. What is X? **A** a covalent compound **B** a macromolecule **C** a metal **D** an ionic compound 


© UCLES 2019 0620/11/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**25** Four different metals are reacted with an equal volume of dilute hydrochloric acid. The results ofthe reactions are shown. 

metal (^) effervescencerate of calcium very high copper none iron low magnesium high What is the order of reactivity of the four metals starting with the most reactive? **A** iron → magnesium → calcium → copper **B** magnesium → calcium → copper → iron **C** copper → iron → magnesium → calcium **D** calcium → magnesium → iron → copper **26** Iron is extracted from its ore in a blast furnace. The equations for four different reactions are shown. 1 4Fe + 3CO 2 → 2Fe 2 O 3 + 3C 2 CO 2 → C + O 2 3 CO 2 + C → 2CO 4 Fe 2 O 3 + 3CO → 2Fe + 3CO 2 Which equations represent reactions that occur in the blast furnace? **A** 1 and 2 only **B** 1 and 3 only **C** 2 and 3 only **D** 3 and 4 only **27** Which statement is correct? **A** Aluminium is used in the manufacture of aircraft because it has a high density. **B** Copper is used for cooking utensils because it is a good conductor of heat. **C** Mild steel is used for car bodies because it is resistant to corrosion. **D** Stainless steel is used for cutlery because it is a conductor of electricity. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/11/O/N/19 

**28** River water contains soluble impurities, insoluble impurities and bacteria. River water is made safe to drink by filtration and chlorination. Which statement is correct? **A** Filtrationimpurities. removes bacteria and insoluble impurities, and chlorination removes soluble **B** Filtration removes insoluble impurities, and chlorination kills the bacteria. **C** Filtration removes soluble and insoluble impurities, and chlorination kills the bacteria. **D** Filtration removes soluble impurities and bacteria, and chlorination removes insoluble impurities. 

**29** Clean, dry air contains nitrogen, oxygen and small amounts of other gases. The noble gases have been left out of the table. Which row shows the composition of clean, dry air? nitrogen / % oxygen / % other gases **A** 21 78 small amount of carbon dioxide **B** 21 78 small amount of carbon monoxide **C** 78 21 small amount of carbon dioxide **D** 78 21 small amount of carbon monoxide 


© UCLES 2019 0620/11/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**30** The apparatus shown is set up and left for a week. damp iron wool air 

 water Which diagram shows the level of the water at the end of the week? A B C D 

**31** Farmers add calcium oxide (lime) and ammonium salts to their fields. The compounds are not added at the same time because they react with each other. Which gas is produced in this reaction? **A** ammonia **B** carbon dioxide **C** hydrogen **D** nitrogen 

**32** Which information about carbon dioxide and methane is correct? 

 carbon dioxide methane A formed when vegetation decomposes   key B greenhouse gas   = true C present in unpolluted air   = false D produced during respiration   


© UCLES 2019 0620/11/O/N/19 

**33** What is **not** a use of sulfur dioxide? **A** as a bleach **B** as a food preservative **C** in the manufacture of wood pulp for paper **D** treating acidic soils 

**34** Which process is used to obtain lime from limestone? **A** cracking **B** fractional distillation **C** neutralisation **D** thermal decomposition 

**35** Petroleum is separated by fractional distillation. Which statement about the fractions produced is correct? **A** Bottled gas for heating and cooking is obtained from the naphtha fraction. **B** Diesel oil is used as a fuel for jet aircraft. **C** Substances used to make polishes are obtained from the lubricating fraction. **D** The kerosene fraction contains many useful waxes. 

**36** Which compounds have similar chemical properties? **A** butanol and butanoic acid **B** ethane and ethene **C** methane and butane **D** propene and propanol 

**37** Which statement about a molecule of ethane is correct? **A** An ethane molecule has at least one double covalent bond. **B** It has C–H and C–O bonds. **C** An ethane molecule has seven covalent bonds. **D** Its bonds are formed by the transfer of electrons. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/11/O/N/19 

**38** Which products are obtained by the cracking of an alkane? 

 alkene hydrogen water A    B    C    D    

**39** Which statements about aqueous ethanoic acid are correct? 1 It has a pH value of 10. 2 It reacts with metal carbonates to produce carbon dioxide gas. 3 It reacts with magnesium metal to produce hydrogen gas. **A** 1, 2 and 3 **B** 1 and 2 only **C** 1 and 3 only **D** 2 and 3 only 

**40** The diagram shows the structure of a monomer and of the polymer made from it. 

 n 

 n 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

 What are the monomer and polymer? monomer polymer A ethane poly(ethane) B ethane poly(ethene) C ethene poly(ethane) D ethene poly(ethene) 


© UCLES 2019 0620/11/O/N/19 

## BLANK PAGE 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeAssessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University ofCambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2019 0620/11/O/N/19 

## BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2019 0620/11/O/N/19 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements^1 Hhydrogen^1 

(^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Beberyllium 9 **Key** atomic numberatomic symbol name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mgmagnesium 24 19 Kpotassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Srstrontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Gegermanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 (^22) Tititanium (^4840) Zrzirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rfrutherfordium– 23 Vvanadium (^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Crchromium (^5242) Momolybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sgseaborgium– (^25) Mnmanganese (^5543) Tctechnetium– (^75) Rerhenium (^186107) Bhbohrium– (^26) Feiron (^5644) Ruruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Ir iridium (^192109) Mtmeitnerium– (^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pdpalladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Dsdarmstadtium– (^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rgroentgenium– (^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cdcadmium (^11280) Hgmercury (^201112) Cncopernicium– 114 F _l_ flerovium– (^116) Lvlivermorium– (^7) Nnitrogen 1415 Pphosphorus (^3133) Asarsenic (^7551) Sbantimony 12283 Bibismuth 209 (^8) Ooxygen 1616 Ssulfur (^3234) Seselenium (^7952) Tetellurium (^12884) Popolonium– (^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Brbromine 8053 I iodine 12785 Atastatine– (^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Scscandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) Lalanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). actinium– (^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium^141 (^91) Paprotactinium 231 (^60) Ndneodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pmpromethium– (^93) Npneptunium– (^62) Smsamarium (^15094) Puplutonium– (^63) Eueuropium (^15295) Amamericium– (^64) Gdgadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bkberkelium– (^66) Dydysprosium 16398 Cfcalifornium– (^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Eseinsteinium– (^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Mdmendelevium– (^70) Ybytterbium (^173102) Nonobelium– (^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lrlawrencium– 


