 This syllabus is regulated for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 14 printed pages and 2 blank pages. IB19 11_0620_23/4RP© UCLES 2019 [Turn over 

# *0520730636* 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/23 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) October/November 2019 Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet^ 45 minutes Soft clean eraserSoft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil.Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unlessthis has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

There areanswers **A** (^) , **forty B** , **C** questions on this paper. Answerand **D**. **all** questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the **one** you consider correct and record your choice in **soft pencil** on the separate Answer Sheet. **Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully.** Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer.Any rough working should be done in this booklet. A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16.Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/23/O/N/19 

**1** Which two gases will diffuse at the same rate, at the same temperature? **A** carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide **B** carbon monoxide and nitrogen **C** chlorine and fluorine **D** nitrogen and oxygen 

**2** A student is asked to measure the time taken for 0.4 g of magnesium carbonate to react completely with 25.0 cm^3 of dilute hydrochloric acid. Which pieces of apparatus does the student need? **A** balance, stop-clock, pipette **B** balance, stop-clock, thermometer **C** balance, pipette, thermometer **D** stop-clock, pipette, thermometer 

**3** A substance is separated using chromatography. The chromatogram is shown. 

## P 

## Q 

## R 

 solvent front 

 baseline 

 Which statement is not correct? A P has a higher R f value than Q. B P, Q and R are all soluble in the solvent. C R is the most soluble substance. D The R f value of P is less than 1. 

**4** Which statement about an ionic compound is **not** correct? **A** It conducts electricity when dissolved in water. **B** It has a high melting point due to strong attractive forces between ions. **C** It has a regular lattice of oppositely charged ions in a ‘sea of electrons’. **D** The ionic bonds are formed between metallic and non-metallic elements. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/23/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**5** The numbers of protons, neutrons and electrons present in the atoms P, Q, R and S are shown. 

atom (^) of protonsnumber of neutronsnumber of electronsnumber P 4 5 4 Q 5 6 5 R 6 6 6 S 6 7 6 Which atoms are isotopes of the same element? **A** P and Q only **B** Q and R only **C** R and S only **D** P and S only **6** Carbon has three isotopes, 12 C, 13 C and 14 C. Why do all three isotopes have the same chemical properties? **A** They all have the same atomic mass. **B** They all have the same number of electrons in their outer shell. **C** They all have the same number of electron shells. **D** They all have the same number of nucleons. 

# 7 Silicon(IV) oxide is a covalently bonded compound. 

 Which statements are correct? 

# 1 Silicon atoms form four single bonds in silicon(IV) oxide. 

# 2 Oxygen atoms form two double bonds in silicon(IV) oxide. 

# 3 Silicon(IV) oxide has a high melting point. 

# 4 Silicon(IV) oxide contains one silicon atom and four oxygen atoms. 

 A 1 and 2 only B 1 and 3 only C 2 and 3 only D 3 and 4 only 

**8** Which statement describes the structure of copper? **A** It has a lattice of negative ions in a ‘sea of electrons’. **B** It has a lattice of negative ions in a ‘sea of protons’. **C** It has a lattice of positive ions in a ‘sea of electrons’. **D** It has a lattice of positive ions in a ‘sea of protons’. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/23/O/N/19 

**9** Magnesium carbonate decomposes on heating to form magnesium oxide and carbon dioxide asshown. 

MgCO 3 → MgO + CO (^2) How much magnesium carbonate is needed to make 5.0 g of magnesium oxide? **A** 3.5 g **B** 4.0 g **C** 6.5 g **D** 10.5 g **10** 90 g of glucose is dissolved in water. The glucose solution is fermented. C 6 H 12 O 6 → 2CO 2 + 2C 2 H 5 OH glucose, _M_ r = 180 ethanol, _M_ r = 46 After the fermentation finishes, 6.8 g of ethanol is obtained from the solution. What is the percentage yield of ethanol? **A** 7.4 **B** 7.6 **C** 14.8 **D** 29.6 **11** The diagram shows a simple cell. dilute sulfuric acid metal P copper wire voltmeter Which metal P produces the smallest voltage? **A** calcium **B** iron **C** magnesium **D** zinc 


© UCLES 2019 0620/23/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**12** Whatconcentrated aqueous sodium chloride? are the ionic half-equations for the electrode reactions during the electrolysis of 

 anode cathode 

**A** C _l_ (^) 2 + 2e –^ → 2C _l_ –^ H 2 → 2H+^ + 2e – **B** 2C _l_ –^ → C _l_ (^) 2 + 2e –^ 2H+^ + 2e –^ → H 2 **C** H 2 → 2H+^ + 2e –^ C _l_ (^) 2 + 2e –^ → 2C _l_ – **D** 2H+^ + 2e –^ → H 2 2C _l_ –^ → C _l_ (^) 2 + 2e – **13** An energy level diagram for a reaction is shown. energy progress of reaction Which statement and explanation about this reaction are correct? statement explanation **A** the reaction is endothermic the products have more energy than the reactants **B** the reaction is endothermic the products have less energy than the reactants **C** the reaction is exothermic the products have more energy than the reactants **D** the reaction is exothermic the products have less energy than the reactants **14** Which gases are used to generate electricity in a fuel cell? **A** carbon dioxide and oxygen **B** hydrogen and methane **C** hydrogen and oxygen **D** methane and carbon dioxide 


© UCLES 2019 0620/23/O/N/19 

**15** A sequence of changes involving sulfur is shown. 

 S(s) change 1^ S(l) change 2 SO 2 (g) Which row describes the changes? change 1 change 2 A chemical chemical B chemical physical C physical chemical D physical physical 

**16** Magnesium reacts with dilute hydrochloric acid. Which statement about the particles in the reaction is correct? **A** Increasing the concentration of dilute hydrochloric acid increases the collision rate but has no effect on the activation energy. **B** Increasing the concentration of dilute hydrochloric acid increases the collision rate and theactivation energy. **C** Increasing the temperature of the reaction increases the activation energy. **D** Increasing the temperature of the reaction causes all collisions to lead to a reaction. 

**17** Two molecules of nitrogen dioxide combine in a reversible reaction to form dinitrogen tetroxide. The forward reaction is exothermic. 2NO 2 (g) N 2 O 4 (g) Which changes in reaction conditions would **both** increase the amount of dinitrogen tetroxide at equilibrium? **A** decreasing the temperature and decreasing the pressure **B** decreasing the temperature and increasing the pressure **C** increasing the temperature and decreasing the pressure **D** increasing the temperature and increasing the pressure 


© UCLES 2019 0620/23/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**18** Chlorine displaces bromine from aqueous potassium bromide. The ionic equation for the reaction is shown. 

C _l_ (^) 2 + 2Br–^ → 2C _l_ –^ + Br 2 Which statement about this reaction is correct? **A** Bromide ions act as an oxidising agent. **B** Bromide ions are oxidised when electrons are lost. **C** Chlorine acts as a reducing agent. **D** Chlorine is reduced when electrons are lost. **19** Which substance is a neutral oxide? **A** aluminium oxide **B** carbon monoxide **C** sulfur dioxide **D** zinc oxide **20** Which statements about dilute sulfuric acid are correct? 1 It turns red litmus paper blue. 

# 2 It reacts with magnesium(II) oxide to form magnesium(II) sulfate and water. 

# 3 It reacts with magnesium to form magnesium(II) sulfate and carbon dioxide. 

 4 Its pH is below pH 7. A 1 and 2 only B 1 and 3 only C 2 and 4 only D 3 and 4 only 


© UCLES 2019 0620/23/O/N/19 

# 21 A method used to make copper(II) sulfate crystals is shown. 

 1 Place dilute sulfuric acid in a beaker. 2 Warm the acid. 

# 3 Add copper(II) oxide until it is in excess. 

 4 Filter the mixture. 5 Evaporate the filtrate until crystals start to form. 6 Leave the filtrate to cool. What are the purposes of step 3 and step 4? step 3 step 4 

# A to ensure all of the acid has reacted to obtain solid copper(II) sulfate 

# B to ensure all of the acid has reacted to remove the excess of copper(II) oxide 

# C to speed up the reaction to obtain solid copper(II) sulfate 

# D to speed up the reaction to remove the excess of copper(II) oxide 

# 22 Lead( II ) iodide is formed as a precipitate in the reaction shown. 

 Pb(NO 3 ) 2 (aq) + 2NaI(aq) → PbI 2 (s) + 2NaNO 3 (aq) 

# Which method is used to separate the lead( II ) iodide from the mixture? 

 A crystallisation B distillation C evaporation D filtration 

**23** Which statement describes a gas which is in Group VIII of the Periodic Table? **A** A colourless gas that helps substances burn. **B** A pollutant gas present in car exhausts. **C** A gas that is less dense than air and makes a ‘pop’ sound with a lighted splint. **D** A gas that is used in lamps. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/23/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**24** Which pair of elements reacts together most violently? **A** chlorine and lithium **B** chlorine and potassium **C** iodine and lithium **D** iodine and potassium 

**25** Iron reacts with dilute hydrochloric acid to form iron(II) chloride, FeC _l_ (^) 2. Iron reacts with chlorine to form iron(III) chloride, FeC _l_ (^) 3. Which property of transition elements is shown by this information? **A** Transition elements have high melting points. **B** Transition elements can act as catalysts. **C** Transition elements have variable oxidation states. **D** Transition elements have coloured compounds. **26** Some properties of substance X are listed. ● It conducts electricity when molten. ● It has a high melting point. ● It burns in oxygen and the oxide dissolves in water to give a solution with pH 11. What is X? **A** a covalent compound **B** a macromolecule **C** a metal **D** an ionic compound **27** Which statement about metals and their uses is correct? **A** Aluminium is used in the manufacture of aircraft because it has a high density. **B** Copper is used to make cooking utensils because it is a poor conductor of heat. **C** Mild steel is used to make car bodies because it is brittle and breaks easily. **D** Stainless steel is used to make cutlery because it is resistant to corrosion. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/23/O/N/19 

**28** Which word equation represents a reaction which occurs? **A** sodium oxide + carbon → sodium + carbon dioxide 

# B sodium oxide + iron → sodium + iron( II ) oxide 

# C iron( II ) oxide + copper → iron + copper( II ) oxide 

# D iron( III ) oxide + carbon → iron + carbon dioxide 

**29** Why is cryolite used in the extraction of aluminium by electrolysis? **A** It changes bauxite to aluminium oxide. **B** It decreases the melting point of the aluminium. **C** It dissolves the aluminium oxide. **D** It protects the anodes from corrosion. 

**30** River water contains soluble impurities, insoluble impurities and bacteria. River water is made safe to drink by filtration and chlorination. Which statement is correct? **A** Filtration removes bacteria and insoluble impurities, and chlorination removes soluble impurities. **B** Filtration removes insoluble impurities, and chlorination kills the bacteria. **C** Filtration removes soluble and insoluble impurities, and chlorination kills the bacteria. **D** Filtrationimpurities. removes soluble impurities and bacteria, and chlorination removes insoluble 

**31** How are oxygen and nitrogen separated from air? **A** chromatography **B** condensation and filtration **C** crystallisation **D** fractional distillation 


© UCLES 2019 0620/23/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**32** The apparatus shown is set up and left for a week. damp iron wool air 

 water Which diagram shows the level of the water at the end of the week? A B C D 

**33** The following processes are part of the carbon cycle. 1 photosynthesis 2 combustion 3 respiration Which processes decrease the amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere? **A** 1 only **B** 1 and 2 only **C** 1 and 3 only **D** 2 and 3 only 


© UCLES 2019 0620/23/O/N/19 

**34** Ammonium sulfate is used as a fertiliser. It is made from ammonia and sulfuric acid. Which words complete gaps 1, 2 and 3? The ......1...... is made by the ......2...... process in which ......3...... is used as a catalyst. 1 2 3 **A** ammonia Contact iron 

# B ammonia Haber vanadium(V) oxide 

# C sulfuric acid Contact vanadium(V) oxide 

 D sulfuric acid Haber iron 

**35** Which type of reaction occurs when lime is manufactured from limestone? **A** combustion **B** neutralisation **C** redox **D** thermal decomposition 

**36** Which statement is correct? **A** Bitumen is used as a fuel for ships. **B** Coal, natural gas and oxygen are all fuels. **C** Hydrogen is the main constituent of natural gas. **D** Petroleum is separated into useful substances by fractional distillation. 

**37** Which products are obtained by the cracking of an alkane? 

 alkene hydrogen water A    B    C    D    


© UCLES 2019 0620/23/O/N/19 

**38** Ethanol is made by fermentation of sugars and by the catalytic addition of steam to ethene. What are two advantages of making ethanol by the catalytic addition of steam to ethene rather than by fermentation of sugars? **A** faster reaction and renewable raw materials **B** purer product and faster reaction **C** renewable raw materials and continuous process **D** uses more energy and forms a purer product 

**39** The diagram shows the structure of a monomer and of the polymer made from it. 

 n 

 n 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

 What are the monomer and polymer? monomer polymer A ethane poly(ethane) B ethane poly(ethene) C ethene poly(ethane) D ethene poly(ethene) 

**40** Proteins and starch are both natural polymers. Both proteins and starch are hydrolysed by dilute acids. What are the products of hydrolysis of proteins and of starch? 

 hydrolysis of proteinsproducts of hydrolysis of starchproducts of A amines and carboxylic acids simple sugars B amines and carboxylic acids alcohols and carboxylic acids C amino acids simple sugars D amino acids alcohols and carboxylic acids 


© UCLES 2019 0620/23/O/N/19 

## BLANK PAGE 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeAssessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University ofCambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2019 0620/23/O/N/19 

## BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2019 0620/23/O/N/19 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements^1 Hhydrogen^1 

(^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Beberyllium 9 **Key** atomic numberatomic symbol name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mgmagnesium 24 19 Kpotassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Srstrontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Gegermanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 (^22) Tititanium (^4840) Zrzirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rfrutherfordium– 23 Vvanadium (^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Crchromium (^5242) Momolybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sgseaborgium– (^25) Mnmanganese (^5543) Tctechnetium– (^75) Rerhenium (^186107) Bhbohrium– (^26) Feiron (^5644) Ruruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Ir iridium (^192109) Mtmeitnerium– (^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pdpalladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Dsdarmstadtium– (^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rgroentgenium– (^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cdcadmium (^11280) Hgmercury (^201112) Cncopernicium– 114 F _l_ flerovium– (^116) Lvlivermorium– (^7) Nnitrogen 1415 Pphosphorus (^3133) Asarsenic (^7551) Sbantimony 12283 Bibismuth 209 (^8) Ooxygen 1616 Ssulfur (^3234) Seselenium (^7952) Tetellurium (^12884) Popolonium– (^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Brbromine 8053 I iodine 12785 Atastatine– (^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Scscandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) Lalanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). actinium– (^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium^141 (^91) Paprotactinium 231 (^60) Ndneodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pmpromethium– (^93) Npneptunium– (^62) Smsamarium (^15094) Puplutonium– (^63) Eueuropium (^15295) Amamericium– (^64) Gdgadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bkberkelium– (^66) Dydysprosium 16398 Cfcalifornium– (^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Eseinsteinium– (^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Mdmendelevium– (^70) Ybytterbium (^173102) Nonobelium– (^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lrlawrencium– 


