 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all questions. Electronic calculators may be used. You may lose marks if you do not show your working or if you do not use appropriate units. Notes for use in qualitative analysis are provided on pages 11 and 12. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/52 

 Paper 5 Practical Test October/November 2019 1 hour 15 minutes Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: As listed in the Confidential Instructions 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

 This document consists of 9 printed pages and 3 blank pages. 

 [Turn over 

 IB19 11_0620_52/2RP © UCLES 2019 

# *0920456226* 

 This syllabus is regulated for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 For Examiner’s Use 

 1 

 2 

 3 

 Total 


**1** You are going to investigate the temperature changes when two different solids, **N** and **O** , dissolve in water. 

 Read all the instructions carefully before starting the experiments. 

 Instructions You are going to do two experiments. 

 (a) Experiment 1 

 ● Put a polystyrene cup in the 250 cm^3 beaker for support. ● Use the measuring cylinder to pour 30 cm^3 of distilled water into the polystyrene cup. ● Measure the initial temperature of the distilled water and record it in the table. ● Add all of solid N to the distilled water, start the timer and stir the mixture with the stirring thermometer. ● Continue to stir the mixture and measure the temperature of the mixture every 30 seconds for three minutes (180 seconds). ● Record your results in the table. 

 time / s 0 30 60 90 120 150 180 

 temperature of mixture / °C 

## [2] 

 (b) Experiment 2 

 ● Place the other polystyrene cup in the 250 cm^3 beaker for support. ● Use the measuring cylinder to pour 30 cm^3 of distilled water into the polystyrene cup. ● Measure the initial temperature of the distilled water and record it in the table. ● Add all of solid O to the distilled water, start the timer and stir the mixture with the stirring thermometer. ● Continue to stir the mixture and measure the temperature of the mixture every 30 seconds for three minutes (180 seconds). ● Record your results in the table. 

 time / s 0 30 60 90 120 150 180 

 temperature of mixture / °C 

## [2] 


 ©UCLES 2019 0620/52/O/N/19 [Turn over 

 (c) Plot your results for Experiments 1 and 2 on the grid. Draw two smooth line graphs. Clearly label your graphs. 

## 0 30 60 90 120 

 time / s 

## 150 180 210 240 

temperature of mixture / °C 

## [4] 

 (d) (i) From your graph , deduce the time taken for the initial temperature of the solution in Experiment 2 to change by 3 °C. 

 Show clearly on the grid how you worked out your answer. 

 .............................. s [3] 

 (ii) Extend your graph for Experiment 1 to suggest the expected temperature of the mixture after 240 seconds. 

 .............................. °C [1] 

 (e) Is the energy change in Experiment 2 exothermic or endothermic? Explain your answer. 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 


**(f)** State **two** possible sources of error in these experiments. Suggest **two** improvements to reduce each of these sources of error. 

 source of error 1 ........................................................................................................................ 

 improvement 1 ........................................................................................................................... 

 source of error 2 ........................................................................................................................ 

 improvement 2 ........................................................................................................................... [4] 

**(g)** Suggest and explain the effect on the results if Experiment 1 were repeated using 15 cm^3 of distilled water. 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [2] 

 [Total: 19] 


**©UCLES 2019 0620/52/O/N/19 [Turn over** 

**2** You are provided with two solids, **P** and **Q** , which are both salts. Do the following tests on solid **P** and solid **Q** , recording all of your observations at each stage. 

 tests on solid P 

 (a) Do a flame test on a small sample of solid P. Record your observations. 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

 Add the rest of solid P to about 10 cm^3 of distilled water in a boiling tube. Stopper the boiling tube and shake the mixture to dissolve solid P and form solution P. Divide solution P into three approximately equal portions in two test-tubes and one boiling tube. 

 (b) (i) Add a few drops of aqueous sodium hydroxide to the first portion of solution P in a test-tube. Record your observations. 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [1] 

 (ii) Now add an excess of aqueous sodium hydroxide to the mixture. Record your observations. 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [1] 

 (c) (i) Add a few drops of aqueous ammonia to the second portion of solution P in a test-tube. Record your observations. 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [1] 

 (ii) Now add an excess of aqueous ammonia to this mixture. Record your observations. 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [2] 

 (d) Add a small piece of aluminium foil and about 2 cm^3 of aqueous sodium^ hydroxide to the third portion of solution P in a boiling tube. Gently warm the mixture. Test the gas produced with litmus paper. Record your observations. 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [3] 

 (e) Identify solid P. 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [2] 


**tests on solid Q** 

**(f)** Do a flame test on a small sample of solid **Q**. Record your observations. 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

**(g)** Add the rest of solid **Q** to about 5 cm^3 of distilled water in a test-tube. Stopper the test-tube and shake the mixture to dissolve solid **Q**. 

 Add a few drops of dilute nitric acid and about 1 cm 3 of aqueous silver nitrate to this solution. Record your observations. 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

**(h)** Identify solid **Q**. 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [2] 

 [Total: 15] 


**©UCLES 2019 0620/52/O/N/19 [Turn over** 

**3** The table gives some information about the properties of three substances found in a hand cream. 

 substance 

 reaction with dilute nitric acid 

 polystyrene beads no reaction 

 calcium carbonate reacts and dissolves sodium fluoride dissolves 

 Use the information in the table to plan an experiment to obtain a pure, dry sample of polystyrene beads from this mixture of substances. 

 You are provided with a mixture of the three substances and common laboratory apparatus. 

 ........................................................................................................................................................... 

 ........................................................................................................................................................... 

 ........................................................................................................................................................... 

 ........................................................................................................................................................... 

 ........................................................................................................................................................... 

 ........................................................................................................................................................... 

 ........................................................................................................................................................... 

 ........................................................................................................................................................... 

 ........................................................................................................................................................... 

 ..................................................................................................................................................... [6] 


## BLANK PAGE 


## BLANK PAGE 


## BLANK PAGE 


**Notes for use in qualitative analysis Tests for anions** 

 anion test test result 

 carbonate (CO 3 2–^ ) add dilute acid effervescence, carbon dioxide produced 

 chloride (C l –^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify with dilute nitric acid, then add aqueous silver nitrate 

 white ppt. 

 bromide (Br –^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify with dilute nitric acid, then add aqueous silver nitrate 

 cream ppt. 

 iodide (I–^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify with dilute nitric acid, then add aqueous silver nitrate 

 yellow ppt. 

 nitrate (NO 3 –^ ) [in solution] 

 add aqueous sodium hydroxide, then aluminium foil; warm carefully 

 ammonia produced 

 sulfate (SO 4 2–^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify, then add aqueous barium nitrate 

 white ppt. 

 sulfite (SO 3 2–^ ) add dilute hydrochloric acid, warm gently and test for the presence of sulfur dioxide 

 sulfur dioxide produced will turn acidified aqueous 

# potassium manganate(VII) from 

 purple to colourless 

**Tests for aqueous cations** 

 cation effect of aqueous sodium hydroxide effect of aqueous ammonia 

 aluminium (A l 3+^ ) white ppt., soluble in excess, giving a colourless solution 

 white ppt., insoluble in excess 

 ammonium (NH 4 +^ ) ammonia produced on warming – 

 calcium (Ca 2+^ ) white ppt., insoluble in excess no ppt., or very slight white ppt. 

# chromium(III) (Cr 3+^ ) green ppt., soluble in excess grey-green ppt., insoluble in excess 

# copper(II) (Cu 2+^ ) light blue ppt., insoluble in excess light blue ppt., soluble in excess, 

 giving a dark blue solution 

# iron(II) (Fe2+^ ) green ppt., insoluble in excess green ppt., insoluble in excess 

# iron(III) (Fe3+^ ) red-brown ppt., insoluble in excess red-brown ppt., insoluble in excess 

 zinc (Zn2+^ ) white ppt., soluble in excess, giving a colourless solution 

 white ppt., soluble in excess, giving a colourless solution 


**Tests for gases Flame tests for metal ions** 

 gas test and test result metal ion flame colour 

 ammonia (NH 3 ) turns damp red litmus paper blue lithium (Li +) red 

 carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) turns limewater milky sodium (Na +) yellow 

chlorine (C _l_ (^) 2 ) bleaches damp litmus paper potassium (K+) lilac 

# hydrogen (H 2 ) ‘pops’ with a lighted splint copper(II) (Cu 2+^ ) blue-green 

 oxygen (O 2 ) relights a glowing splint 

 sulfur dioxide (SO 2 ) turns acidified aqueous 

# potassium manganate(VII) from 

 purple to colourless 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. 


