 This syllabus is regulated for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. IB19 11_0620_12/4RP© UCLES 2019 [Turn over 

# *4346624822* 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/12 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) October/November 2019 Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet^ 45 minutes Soft clean eraserSoft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil.Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unlessthis has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

There areanswers **A** (^) , **forty B** , **C** questions on this paper. Answerand **D**. **all** questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the **one** you consider correct and record your choice in **soft pencil** on the separate Answer Sheet. **Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully.** Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer.Any rough working should be done in this booklet. A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16.Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/12/O/N/19 

**1** The diagram shows a cup of hot tea. 

 Which row describes the water particles in the air above the cup compared with the water particles in the cup? moving faster closer together A   B   C   D   

**2** A student is asked to measure the time taken for 0.4 g of magnesium carbonate to react completely with 25.0 cm^3 of dilute hydrochloric acid. Which pieces of apparatus does the student need? **A** balance, stop-clock, pipette **B** balance, stop-clock, thermometer **C** balance, pipette, thermometer **D** stop-clock, pipette, thermometer 

**3** Petroleum is a mixture. Which method is used to separate petroleum? **A** chromatography **B** cracking **C** filtration **D** fractional distillation 


© UCLES 2019 0620/12/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**4** Magnesium hydroxide can be obtained from sea water as shown. calcium hydroxide solution 

 reaction vessel 

 separation stage 

 solid magnesium hydroxide 

 sea water containing magnesium ions 

 aqueous calcium chloride 

 Which process is used in the separation stage to separate solid magnesium hydroxide from themixture? A crystallisation B filtration C distillation D chromatography 

**5** What is the total number of electrons in one molecule of ammonia, NH 3? **A** 6 **B** 8 **C** 10 **D** 11 

# 6 An isotope of lithium has the symbol 73 Li. 

 What is the arrangement of electrons in one atom of this isotope of lithium? A B C D 

**7** Which statement about an alloy is correct? **A** It is a compound made of two or more elements, one of which is a metal. **B** It is a layer of a metal plated onto another metal. **C** It is a mixture of a metal with other elements. **D** It is a single element. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/12/O/N/19 

**8** Graphite is a form of carbon. Why can graphite be used as a lubricant? **A** Graphite contains unbonded electrons which move through the structure. **B** Graphite contains weak covalent bonds so the atoms move easily. **C** Graphite has a low melting point so it easily turns into a liquid. **D** Graphite has weak attractive forces between layers so they can move. 

**9** Magnesium burns in oxygen to form magnesium oxide. The equation for the reaction is shown. 2Mg + O 2 → 2MgO Which mass of magnesium oxide is formed when 48 g of magnesium is burned? **A** 20 g **B** 40 g **C** 80 g **D** 160 g 

**10** The apparatus used for electrolysis is shown. 

 electrodes 

 electrolyte 

 power supply 

 Which statement is correct? A Copper forms at the anode in some electrolysis reactions. B Hydrogen forms at the cathode in some electrolysis reactions. C Oxygen forms at the cathode in some electrolysis reactions. D The negative electrode is called the anode. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/12/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**11** The temperature of the water in two beakers, X and Y, is measured as 21.5 °C. 

 5 g of sodium chloride is dissolved in the water in beaker X. The temperature changes to 18.0 °C. 5 g of calcium oxide is dissolved in the water in beaker Y. The temperature changes to 29.4 °C. Which types of process are occurring in beakers X and Y? X Y A endothermic endothermic B endothermic exothermic C exothermic endothermic D exothermic exothermic 

**12** Which reaction produces a white-coloured substance? 

# A adding water to anhydrous cobalt(II) chloride 

# B adding water to anhydrous copper(II) sulfate 

# C heating hydrated cobalt(II) chloride 

# D heating hydrated copper(II) sulfate 

**13** Four students collect the gas produced from the reaction of calcium carbonate with dilute hydrochloric acid. Each student records the time taken to collect a volume of gas. Which results show the highest average rate of reaction? **A** 15 cm^3 of gas collected in 20 seconds **B** 50 cm^3 of gas collected in 40 seconds **C** 75 cm^3 of gas collected in 80 seconds **D** 90 cm^3 of gas collected in 100 seconds 

**14** Which row identifies a chemical and a physical change? 

 chemical change physical change A boiling ethanol burning ethanol B burning ethanol evaporating ethanol C dissolving ethanol in water burning ethanol D evaporating ethanol dissolving ethanol in water 


© UCLES 2019 0620/12/O/N/19 

**15** When magnesium is heated with zinc oxide a reaction occurs. The equation is shown. Mg + ZnO → MgO + Zn Which substance is oxidised? **A** magnesium **B** magnesium oxide **C** zinc **D** zinc oxide 

**16** Which statement describes the properties of hydrochloric acid? **A** Carbon dioxide is produced when limestone reacts with hydrochloric acid. **B** Hydrogen is produced when sodium hydroxide reacts with hydrochloric acid. **C** Methyl orange turns yellow in strong hydrochloric acid. **D** Red litmus paper turns blue when dipped into hydrochloric acid. 

**17** A sample of X is heated with aqueous sodium hydroxide and small pieces of aluminium. A gas is produced which turns red litmus paper blue. Aqueous sodium hydroxide solution is added to a second sample of X. A pale green precipitate is observed. What is X? **A** ammonium nitrate 

# B chromium(II) chloride 

# C iron(II) nitrate 

# D iron(II) sulfate 

**18** Which element forms an acidic oxide? **A** calcium **B** lithium **C** magnesium **D** sulfur 


© UCLES 2019 0620/12/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

# 19 A method used to make copper(II) sulfate crystals is shown. 

 1 Place dilute sulfuric acid in a beaker. 2 Warm the acid. 

# 3 Add copper(II) oxide until it is in excess. 

 4 Filter the mixture. 5 Evaporate the filtrate until crystals start to form. 6 Leave the filtrate to cool. What are the purposes of step 3 and step 4? step 3 step 4 

# A to ensure all of the acid has reacted to obtain solid copper(II) sulfate 

# B to ensure all of the acid has reacted to remove the excess of copper(II) oxide 

# C to speed up the reaction to obtain solid copper(II) sulfate 

# D to speed up the reaction to remove the excess of copper(II) oxide 

**20** Which statements describe changes that occur from left to right across a period of the PeriodicTable? 

 1 The atomic number of the elements increases. 2 The metallic character of the elements decreases. 3 The physical state of the elements changes from gas to solid. A 2 only B 1 and 2 only C 1 and 3 only D 2 and 3 only 

**21** Which pair of elements reacts together most violently? **A** chlorine and lithium **B** chlorine and potassium **C** iodine and lithium **D** iodine and potassium 

**22** Which is a typical property of transition elements? **A** can act as catalysts **B** poor electrical conductivity **C** low melting point **D** low density 


© UCLES 2019 0620/12/O/N/19 

**23** Helium is a noble gas. Which statement about helium is correct? **A** It has eight electrons in its outer shell. **B** It is a diatomic gas. **C** It is reactive. **D** It is used for filling balloons. 

**24** Some properties of substance X are listed. ● It conducts electricity when molten. ● It has a high melting point. ● It burns in oxygen and the oxide dissolves in water to give a solution with pH 11. What is X? **A** a covalent compound **B** a macromolecule **C** a metal **D** an ionic compound 


© UCLES 2019 0620/12/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**25** Four unknown metals, Q, R, S and T, are reacted with water, steam and dilute hydrochloric acid. The results are shown in the table. reaction with water 

 reaction with steam 

 reaction with dilute hydrochloric acid Q slow reaction fast reaction fast reaction R no reaction no reaction no reaction S no reaction very slow reaction slow reaction T fast reaction explodes explodes Which statements are correct? 1 R is the least reactive metal. 2 T could be potassium. 3 S is more reactive than Q and R. 4 Metals react faster with steam than they do with water. A 1, 2 and 4 only B 1 and 2 only C 2 and 3 only D 3 and 4 only 

**26** What is added to molten iron to make steel? **A** small amounts of carbon **B** limestone and coke **C** calcium oxide and oxygen **D** hematite and air 

**27** Which row describes the uses of aluminium, copper and mild steel? 

 aluminium copper mild steel A aircraft bodies electrical wiring car bodies B car bodies cooking utensils electrical wiring C electrical wiring aircraft bodies food containers D food containers aircraft bodies cooking utensils 


© UCLES 2019 0620/12/O/N/19 

**28** River water contains soluble impurities, insoluble impurities and bacteria. River water is made safe to drink by filtration and chlorination. Which statement is correct? **A** Filtrationimpurities. removes bacteria and insoluble impurities, and chlorination removes soluble **B** Filtration removes insoluble impurities, and chlorination kills the bacteria. **C** Filtration removes soluble and insoluble impurities, and chlorination kills the bacteria. **D** Filtration removes soluble impurities and bacteria, and chlorination removes insoluble impurities. 

**29** Clean, dry air contains nitrogen, oxygen and small amounts of other gases. The noble gases have been left out of the table. Which row shows the composition of clean, dry air? nitrogen / % oxygen / % other gases **A** 21 78 small amount of carbon dioxide **B** 21 78 small amount of carbon monoxide **C** 78 21 small amount of carbon dioxide **D** 78 21 small amount of carbon monoxide 


© UCLES 2019 0620/12/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**30** The apparatus shown is set up and left for a week. damp iron wool air 

 water Which diagram shows the level of the water at the end of the week? A B C D 

**31** Farmers add calcium oxide (lime) and ammonium salts to their fields. The compounds are not added at the same time because they react with each other. Which gas is produced in this reaction? **A** ammonia **B** carbon dioxide **C** hydrogen **D** nitrogen 

**32** Which information about carbon dioxide and methane is correct? 

 carbon dioxide methane A formed when vegetation decomposes   key B greenhouse gas   = true C present in unpolluted air   = false D produced during respiration   


© UCLES 2019 0620/12/O/N/19 

**33** Which statement about the uses of sulfur dioxide is **not** correct? **A** It is used as a bleach in the manufacture of paper. **B** It is used as a food preservative. **C** It is used in the manufacture of cement. **D** It is used in the manufacture of sulfuric acid. 

**34** Which statement about limestone and lime is correct? **A** Limestone combines with water to produce slaked lime. **B** Lime is obtained from limestone by oxidation. **C** Lime is used in the desulfurisation of flue gases. **D** Lime is used in the treatment of alkaline soil. 

**35** Some fractions obtained from petroleum are listed. 

 fraction use position collectedin the fractionating column 1 gasoline waxes and polishes below refinery gas 2 bitumen making roads above kerosene 3 kerosene jet fuel below gasoline 4 refinery gas heating and cooking above gasoline Which rows are correct? A 1, 3 and 4 B 2, 3 and 4 C 3 and 4 only D 4 only 


© UCLES 2019 0620/12/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**36** The structures of three compounds are shown. 

 H C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

 Br H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

 C Br Br 

## H 

## H 

## H 

 Which statement explains why these three compounds have similar chemical properties? A They all contain bromine, carbon and hydrogen. B They all contain the same functional group. C They are all carbon-based molecules. D They are all saturated molecules. 

**37** Which statement about ethane is correct? **A** It rapidly decolourises aqueous bromine. **B** It does not burn. **C** It forms long-chain compounds called polymers. **D** It only contains single bonds between its atoms. 

**38** Which products are obtained by the cracking of an alkane? 

 alkene hydrogen water A    B    C    D    

**39** Which statement about an aqueous solution of ethanoic acid is correct? **A** It reacts with magnesium to form water as one of the products. **B** It reacts with sodium carbonate to form carbon dioxide. **C** It reacts with sodium hydroxide to form hydrogen. **D** It turns red litmus paper blue. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/12/O/N/19 

**40** The diagram shows the structure of a monomer and of the polymer made from it. 

 n 

 n 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

 What are the monomer and polymer? monomer polymer A ethane poly(ethane) B ethane poly(ethene) C ethene poly(ethane) D ethene poly(ethene) 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeAssessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University ofCambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2019 0620/12/O/N/19 

## BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2019 0620/12/O/N/19 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements^1 Hhydrogen^1 

(^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Beberyllium 9 **Key** atomic numberatomic symbol name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mgmagnesium 24 19 Kpotassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Srstrontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Gegermanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 (^22) Tititanium (^4840) Zrzirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rfrutherfordium– 23 Vvanadium (^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Crchromium (^5242) Momolybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sgseaborgium– (^25) Mnmanganese (^5543) Tctechnetium– (^75) Rerhenium (^186107) Bhbohrium– (^26) Feiron (^5644) Ruruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Ir iridium (^192109) Mtmeitnerium– (^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pdpalladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Dsdarmstadtium– (^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rgroentgenium– (^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cdcadmium (^11280) Hgmercury (^201112) Cncopernicium– 114 F _l_ flerovium– (^116) Lvlivermorium– (^7) Nnitrogen 1415 Pphosphorus (^3133) Asarsenic (^7551) Sbantimony 12283 Bibismuth 209 (^8) Ooxygen 1616 Ssulfur (^3234) Seselenium (^7952) Tetellurium (^12884) Popolonium– (^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Brbromine 8053 I iodine 12785 Atastatine– (^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Scscandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) Lalanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). actinium– (^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium^141 (^91) Paprotactinium 231 (^60) Ndneodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pmpromethium– (^93) Npneptunium– (^62) Smsamarium (^15094) Puplutonium– (^63) Eueuropium (^15295) Amamericium– (^64) Gdgadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bkberkelium– (^66) Dydysprosium 16398 Cfcalifornium– (^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Eseinsteinium– (^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Mdmendelevium– (^70) Ybytterbium (^173102) Nonobelium– (^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lrlawrencium– 


