 This syllabus is regulated for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 14 printed pages and 2 blank pages. IB19 11_0620_13/3RP© UCLES 2019 [Turn over 

# *3282949697* 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/13 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) October/November 2019 Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet^ 45 minutes Soft clean eraserSoft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil.Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unlessthis has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

There areanswers **A** (^) , **forty B** , **C** questions on this paper. Answerand **D**. **all** questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the **one** you consider correct and record your choice in **soft pencil** on the separate Answer Sheet. **Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully.** Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer.Any rough working should be done in this booklet. A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16.Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/13/O/N/19 

**1** The diagram shows a cup of hot tea. 

 Which row describes the water particles in the air above the cup compared with the water particles in the cup? moving faster closer together A   B   C   D   

**2** A student is asked to measure the time taken for 0.4 g of magnesium carbonate to react completely with 25.0 cm^3 of dilute hydrochloric acid. Which pieces of apparatus does the student need? **A** balance, stop-clock, pipette **B** balance, stop-clock, thermometer **C** balance, pipette, thermometer **D** stop-clock, pipette, thermometer 

**3** Which method is used to separate a mixture of the following liquids? 

 liquid boiling point / °C methanol 64.5 ethanol 78.5 propan-1-ol 97.2 butan-1-ol 117.0 A crystallisation B evaporation C filtration D fractional distillation 


© UCLES 2019 0620/13/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**4** A sample of wax is heated. It begins to melt at 45 °C and finishes melting at 49 °C. 

 A sample of liquid is heated. It begins to boil at 141 °C and remains at 141 °C while it boils. Which conclusion can be made from these results? A Both substances are impure. B Both substances are pure. C The wax is not a pure substance and the liquid is a pure substance. D The wax is a pure substance and the liquid is not a pure substance. 

**5** In which molecule are all the outer shell electrons involved in covalent bonding? 

**A** C _l_ (^) 2 **B** CH 4 **C** HC _l_ **D** NH 3 **6** The numbers of protons, neutrons and electrons present in the atoms P, Q, R and S are shown. atom (^) of protonsnumber of neutronsnumber of electronsnumber P 4 5 4 Q 5 6 5 R 6 6 6 S 6 7 6 Which atoms are isotopes of the same element? **A** P and Q only **B** Q and R only **C** R and S only **D** P and S only **7** What is an alloy? **A** a compound of two metallic elements **B** a compound of metallic and non-metallic elements **C** a mixture of a metal and at least one other element **D** a pure metal element **8** Graphite is a form of carbon. Why can graphite be used as a lubricant? **A** Graphite contains unbonded electrons which move through the structure. **B** Graphite contains weak covalent bonds so the atoms move easily. **C** Graphite has a low melting point so it easily turns into a liquid. **D** Graphite has weak attractive forces between layers so they can move. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/13/O/N/19 

**9** The thermal decomposition of 12.5calcium oxide. g of limestone (impure calcium carbonate) produces 5 g of 

 Which mass of calcium oxide is produced by the thermal decomposition of 30 g of limestone? A 6 g B 12 g C 15 g D 24 g 

# 10 Dilute sulfuric acid and lead( II ) bromide are separately electrolysed. 

 Which statements are correct? 1 Colourless gases are evolved when dilute sulfuric acid is electrolysed. 

# 2 Lead( II ) bromide can be electrolysed when molten. 

# 3 Lead is formed at the positive electrode when lead( II ) bromide is electrolysed. 

 4 Sulfate ions are produced at the negative electrode when dilute sulfuric acid is electrolysed. A 1 and 2 only B 1 and 3 only C 2 and 3 only D 3 and 4 only 

**11** An energy level diagram for a reaction is shown. 

 energy 

 progress of reaction Which statement and explanation about this reaction are correct? statement explanation A the reaction is endothermic the products have more energy than the reactants B the reaction is endothermic the products have less energy than the reactants C the reaction is exothermic the products have more energy than the reactants D the reaction is exothermic the products have less energy than the reactants 


© UCLES 2019 0620/13/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

# 12 Hydrated cobalt(II) chloride decomposes when heated. 

CoC _l_ (^) 2 •6H 2 O CoC _l_ (^) 2 + 6H 2 O Which statements about this reaction are correct? 1 CoC _l_ (^) 2 is anhydrous cobalt(II) chloride. 2 Heat is released when water is added to CoC _l_ (^) 2. 3 CoC _l_ (^) 2 •6H 2 O is blue. 4 The reaction is not reversible. **A** 1 and 2 **B** 1 and 3 **C** 2 and 4 **D** 3 and 4 **13** In experiment 1, small lumps of limestone are added to dilute hydrochloric acid at 40 °C. The volume of carbon dioxide released is measured at regular time intervals. The results are shown. volume of carbon dioxide released time experiment 1 experiment 2 Which changes give the results shown in experiment 2? limestone temperature/ °C **A** large lumps 40 **B** powder 40 **C** powder 60 **D** small lumps 60 


© UCLES 2019 0620/13/O/N/19 

**14** A sequence of changes involving sulfur is shown. 

 S(s) change 1^ S(l) change 2 SO 2 (g) Which row describes the changes? change 1 change 2 A chemical chemical B chemical physical C physical chemical D physical physical 

**15** In which equation is the iron oxidised? **A** C + FeO → CO + Fe **B** 3CO + Fe 2 O 3 → 3CO 2 + 2Fe **C** Fe 2 O 3 + H 2 → 2FeO + H 2 O **D** PbO + Fe → Pb + FeO 

**16** Which statements about dilute sulfuric acid are correct? 1 It turns red litmus paper blue. 

# 2 It reacts with magnesium(II) oxide to form magnesium(II) sulfate and water. 

# 3 It reacts with magnesium to form magnesium(II) sulfate and carbon dioxide. 

 4 Its pH is below pH 7. A 1 and 2 only B 1 and 3 only C 2 and 4 only D 3 and 4 only 


© UCLES 2019 0620/13/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**17** X is a white powder. The following tests are done on X. ● No precipitate is seen when a few drops of aqueous sodium hydroxide are added to a solution of X. ● No gas is formed when X is heated with aqueous sodium hydroxide. ● X gives a lilac colour when put into a flame. ● When acidified aqueous silver nitrate is added to a solution of X a yellow precipitate is seen. What is X? **A** ammonium bromide **B** ammonium iodide **C** potassium bromide **D** potassium iodide 

**18** Which three oxides are all acidic? **A** CaO, NO 2 , SO 2 **B** CaO, CO 2 , Na 2 O **C** CO 2 , NO 2 , SO 2 **D** CO 2 , Na 2 O, SO 2 

# 19 A method used to make copper(II) sulfate crystals is shown. 

 1 Place dilute sulfuric acid in a beaker. 2 Warm the acid. 

# 3 Add copper(II) oxide until it is in excess. 

 4 Filter the mixture. 5 Evaporate the filtrate until crystals start to form. 6 Leave the filtrate to cool. What are the purposes of step 3 and step 4? step 3 step 4 

# A to ensure all of the acid has reacted to obtain solid copper(II) sulfate 

# B to ensure all of the acid has reacted to remove the excess of copper(II) oxide 

# C to speed up the reaction to obtain solid copper(II) sulfate 

# D to speed up the reaction to remove the excess of copper(II) oxide 


© UCLES 2019 0620/13/O/N/19 

**20** Which element from Period 3 of the Periodic Table has the most metallic character? **A** aluminium **B** magnesium **C** silicon **D** sodium 

**21** Which pair of elements reacts together most violently? **A** chlorine and lithium **B** chlorine and potassium **C** iodine and lithium **D** iodine and potassium 

**22** Which statement does **not** describe a transition element? **A** It is used as a catalyst in industrial reactions. **B** It has white compounds and gives a yellow flame test. **C** It produces a black oxide and a blue sulfate. **D** It forms green, violet and orange compounds. 

**23** Which statement describes a gas which is in Group VIII of the Periodic Table? **A** A colourless gas that helps substances burn. **B** A pollutant gas present in car exhausts. **C** A gas that is less dense than air and makes a ‘pop’ sound with a lighted splint. **D** A gas that is used in lamps. 

**24** Some properties of substance X are listed. ● It conducts electricity when molten. ● It has a high melting point. ● It burns in oxygen and the oxide dissolves in water to give a solution with pH 11. What is X? **A** a covalent compound **B** a macromolecule **C** a metal **D** an ionic compound 


© UCLES 2019 0620/13/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**25** A metal reacts vigorously with water. Which statement about the metal is correct? **A** It is above hydrogen in the reactivity series. **B** It is below magnesium in the reactivity series. **C** Its oxide can be reduced with carbon. **D** It does not react with dilute acids. 

**26** Iron is extracted from its ore in the blast furnace. Which raw material is **not** used in this process? **A** bauxite **B** coke **C** hematite **D** limestone 

**27** Which statement about metals and their uses is correct? **A** Aluminium is used in the manufacture of aircraft because it has a high density. **B** Copper is used to make cooking utensils because it is a poor conductor of heat. **C** Mild steel is used to make car bodies because it is brittle and breaks easily. **D** Stainless steel is used to make cutlery because it is resistant to corrosion. 

**28** River water contains soluble impurities, insoluble impurities and bacteria. River water is made safe to drink by filtration and chlorination. Which statement is correct? **A** Filtration removes bacteria and insoluble impurities, and chlorination removes soluble impurities. **B** Filtration removes insoluble impurities, and chlorination kills the bacteria. **C** Filtration removes soluble and insoluble impurities, and chlorination kills the bacteria. **D** Filtrationimpurities. removes soluble impurities and bacteria, and chlorination removes insoluble 


© UCLES 2019 0620/13/O/N/19 

**29** Clean, dry air contains nitrogen, oxygen and small amounts of other gases. The noble gaseshave been left out of the table. 

 Which row shows the composition of clean, dry air? nitrogen / % oxygen / % other gases A 21 78 small amount of carbon dioxide B 21 78 small amount of carbon monoxide C 78 21 small amount of carbon dioxide D 78 21 small amount of carbon monoxide 

**30** The apparatus shown is set up and left for a week. damp iron wool air 

 water Which diagram shows the level of the water at the end of the week? A B C D 


© UCLES 2019 0620/13/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**31** Farmers add calcium oxide (lime) and ammonium salts to their fields. The compounds are not added at the same time because they react with each other. Which gas is produced in this reaction? **A** ammonia **B** carbon dioxide **C** hydrogen **D** nitrogen 

**32** Which information about carbon dioxide and methane is correct? 

 carbon dioxide methane A formed when vegetation decomposes   key B greenhouse gas   = true C present in unpolluted air   = false D produced during respiration   

**33** What are uses of sulfur dioxide? 1 as a bleach in the manufacture of wood pulp 2 as a food preservative 3 in the conversion of iron to steel 4 in water treatment **A** 1 and 2 only **B** 1 and 3 only **C** 2 and 3 only **D** 2 and 4 only 

**34** Which type of reaction occurs when lime is manufactured from limestone? **A** combustion **B** neutralisation **C** redox **D** thermal decomposition 

**35** Which statement is correct? **A** Bitumen is used as a fuel for ships. **B** Coal, natural gas and oxygen are all fuels. **C** Hydrogen is the main constituent of natural gas. **D** Petroleum is separated into useful substances by fractional distillation. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/13/O/N/19 

**36** The structures of four organic compounds, W, X, Y and Z, are shown. 

## H C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## Z 

## H 

## H 

## H C H 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## Y 

## H 

## H 

## O H 

## X 

## H C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## W 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## H H C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

 Which compounds are members of the same homologous series? A W and X B W and Z C X and Y D Y and Z 

**37** How many different types of bonds are present in ethanoic acid, CH 3 COOH? 

 type of bond C–H C–C C=O A 3 1 1 B 3 0 2 C 4 0 2 D 4 1 2 

**38** Which products are obtained by the cracking of an alkane? 

 alkene hydrogen water A    B    C    D    

**39** Which statement about aqueous ethanoic acid is correct? **A** It reacts with magnesium to form oxygen gas. **B** It reacts with sodium carbonate to form carbon dioxide gas. **C** It turns red litmus paper blue. **D** It turns methyl orange yellow. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/13/O/N/19 

**40** The diagram shows the structure of a monomer and of the polymer made from it. 

 n 

 n 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

 What are the monomer and polymer? monomer polymer A ethane poly(ethane) B ethane poly(ethene) C ethene poly(ethane) D ethene poly(ethene) 


© UCLES 2019 0620/13/O/N/19 

## BLANK PAGE 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeAssessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University ofCambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2019 0620/13/O/N/19 

## BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2019 0620/13/O/N/19 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements^1 Hhydrogen^1 

(^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Beberyllium 9 **Key** atomic numberatomic symbol name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mgmagnesium 24 19 Kpotassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Srstrontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Gegermanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 (^22) Tititanium (^4840) Zrzirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rfrutherfordium– 23 Vvanadium (^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Crchromium (^5242) Momolybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sgseaborgium– (^25) Mnmanganese (^5543) Tctechnetium– (^75) Rerhenium (^186107) Bhbohrium– (^26) Feiron (^5644) Ruruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Ir iridium (^192109) Mtmeitnerium– (^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pdpalladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Dsdarmstadtium– (^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rgroentgenium– (^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cdcadmium (^11280) Hgmercury (^201112) Cncopernicium– 114 F _l_ flerovium– (^116) Lvlivermorium– (^7) Nnitrogen 1415 Pphosphorus (^3133) Asarsenic (^7551) Sbantimony 12283 Bibismuth 209 (^8) Ooxygen 1616 Ssulfur (^3234) Seselenium (^7952) Tetellurium (^12884) Popolonium– (^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Brbromine 8053 I iodine 12785 Atastatine– (^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Scscandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) Lalanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). actinium– (^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium^141 (^91) Paprotactinium 231 (^60) Ndneodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pmpromethium– (^93) Npneptunium– (^62) Smsamarium (^15094) Puplutonium– (^63) Eueuropium (^15295) Amamericium– (^64) Gdgadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bkberkelium– (^66) Dydysprosium 16398 Cfcalifornium– (^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Eseinsteinium– (^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Mdmendelevium– (^70) Ybytterbium (^173102) Nonobelium– (^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lrlawrencium– 


