 This syllabus is regulated for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 7 printed pages. 

© UCLES 2019 **[Turn over** 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

**PHYSICS 0625/53** Paper 5 Practical Test **May/June 2019** MARK SCHEME Maximum Mark: 40 

 Published 

This mark scheme is published as an aid to teachers and candidates, to indicate the requirements of theexamination. It shows the basis on which Examiners were instructed to award marks. It does not indicate the details of the discussions that took place at an Examiners’ meeting before marking began, which would haveconsidered the acceptability of alternative answers. 

Mark schemes should be read in conjunction with the question paper and the Principal Examiner Report forTeachers. 

Cambridge International will not enter into discussions about these mark schemes. Cambridge International is publishing the mark schemes for the May/June 2019 series for mostCambridge IGCSE™, Cambridge International A and AS Level and Cambridge Pre-U components, and some Cambridge O Level components. 


## PUBLISHED 

 Generic Marking Principles These general marking principles must be applied by all examiners when marking candidate answers. They should be applied alongside the specific content of the mark scheme or generic level descriptors for a question. Each question paper and mark scheme will also comply with thesemarking principles. 

GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 1: Marks must be awarded in line with: ï the specific content of the mark scheme or the generic level descriptors for the question ï the specific skills defined in the mark scheme or in the generic level descriptors for the question ï the standard of response required by a candidate as exemplified by the standardisation scripts. GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 2: Marks awarded are always **whole marks** (not half marks, or other fractions). GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 3: Marks must be awarded **positively** : 

ï marks are awarded for correct/valid answers, as defined in the mark scheme. However, credit is given for valid answers which go beyond thescope of the syllabus and mark scheme, referring to your Team Leader as appropriate ï marks are awarded when candidates clearly demonstrate what they know and can do ï marks are not deducted for errors ï marks are not deducted for omissions ï answers should only be judged on the quality of spelling, punctuation and grammar when these features are specifically assessed by thequestion as indicated by the mark scheme. The meaning, however, should be unambiguous. 

GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 4: Rules must be applied consistently e.g. in situations where candidates have not followed instructions or in the application of generic level descriptors. GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 5: Marks should be awarded using the full range of marks defined in the mark scheme for the question (however; the use of the full mark range may be limited according to the quality of the candidate responses seen). 


## PUBLISHED 

## GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 6: 

Marks awarded are based solely on the requirements as defined in the mark scheme. Marks should not be awarded with grade thresholds or grade descriptors in mind. 


## PUBLISHED 

**Question Answer Marks** 1(a) 5 _b_ values decreasing **1** all < 75.0 cm and recorded to at least 1 dp **1** 1(b) graph: axes labelled correct orientation, with quantity and unit **1** appropriate scales (plots occupying at least ½ grid) **1** plots all correct to less than ½ small square and precise plots **1** well-judged line and thin line **1** 1(c)(i) _G_ present and triangle method seen on graph **1** 1(c)(ii) _M_ U in range 70.0 to 130.0 (g) **1** 

2/3 sig figs and unit (^) **1** 1(d) (difficult to see centre of block) and valid method, e.g. ï (measure width of block and) add ½ width to 5.0 cm to find position for edge of block ï mean value of marks at both edges of mass ï mark centre line of mass and align with mark on rule 

## 1 

1(e) move block back and forth to find the point of balance / owtte (^) **1** 


## PUBLISHED 

**Question Answer Marks** 

2(a) sensible value for _θ_ (^) R **1** 2(b) _θ_ (^) C increasing **1** _θ_ (^) H decreasing **1** _θ_ (^) H decreasing more slowly than _θ_ (^) C increasing **1** 2(c) s, °C, °C, °C – all correct **1** 30, 60, 90, 120, 150, 180 **1** 2(d)(i) between _θ_ (^) H at 180 s and halfway between _θ_ (^) H and _θ_ (^) C at 180 s **1** justification with reference to hot and cold water trends **1** 2(d)(ii) _θ_ (^) R / room temperature **1** 2(e) any **two** from: ï thinner walls on tube ï metal tube ï bung/lid on tube ï insulate sides of beaker/lid on beaker ï higher initial hot water temperature ï lower initial cold water temperature ï increase volume of hot water ï decrease volume of cold water ï stirring 

## 2 


## PUBLISHED 

**Question Answer Marks** 3(a) 3 _V_ X ≈ _V_ XY and recorded to at least 1 dp and < 4.0 V **1** 

3(b) _I_ (^) X ≈ _I_ (^) XY and recorded to at least 2 dp and < 1.00 A **1** 3(c)(i) A, V, Ω **1** 3(c)(ii) statement matching results and ‘currents the same within limits of experimental accuracy’ / owtte **1** 3(d)(i) correct calculations of _R_ **1** consistent 2 or consistent 3 sig figs **1** 3(d)(ii) (^) _R_ (^) Y and _R_ (^) Z both within 10% of 10 (Ω) **1** 3(e) 3 resistors in parallel arrangement and circuit symbols correct **1** voltmeter and ammeter in correct arrangement and circuit symbols correct **1** 3(f) _I_ (^) P and _V_ P present **1** _R_ (^) P < _R_ (^) X **1** 


## PUBLISHED 

**Question Answer Marks** 4 **MP1 Apparatus** metre rule / measuring tape 

## 1 

 MP2 Method drop ball from measured height measure height of bouncerepeat for different height of release 

## 1 

 MP3 Precaution any one from: ï repeat (for each height of release) and average ï measure to same part of ball each time ï measure height of bounce at eye level ï release without throwing/impeding ï use of video (for height of bounce) 

## 1 

 MP4 Control variable any one from: ï same (diameter/mass/material) ball ï type of floor covering 

## 1 

 MP5 Table columns for release height and bounce height and units 1 MP6 Analysis any one from: ï suitable analysis of readings ï draw a suitable graph of drop height against bounce height 

## 1 

 MP7 Additional point any one from: ï additional control variable ï at least 5 sets of data taken ï repeat experiment for different diameter of ball/floor covering ï automatic release to eliminate differences 

## 1 


