® IGCSE is the registered trademark of Cambridge International Examinations. 

 This syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 10 printed pages. 

© UCLES 2016 [Turn over 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

PHYSICS 0625/42 

Paper 4 Extended Theory May/June 2016 

MARK SCHEME 

Maximum Mark: 80 

 Published 

This mark scheme is published as an aid to teachers and candidates, to indicate the requirements of the examination. It shows the basis on which Examiners were instructed to award marks. It does not indicate the details of the discussions that took place at an Examiners’ meeting before marking began, which would have considered the acceptability of alternative answers. 

Mark schemes should be read in conjunction with the question paper and the Principal Examiner Report for Teachers. 

Cambridge will not enter into discussions about these mark schemes. 

Cambridge is publishing the mark schemes for the May/June 2016 series for most Cambridge IGCSE®, Cambridge International A and AS Level components and some Cambridge O Level components. 


 Page 2 Mark Scheme Syllabus Paper Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 0625 42 

 © Cambridge International Examinations 2016 

## NOTES ABOUT MARK SCHEME SYMBOLS AND OTHER MATTERS 

B marks are independent marks, which do not depend on other marks. For a B mark to be scored, the point to which it refers must be seen specifically in the candidate’s answer. 

M marks are method marks upon which accuracy marks (A marks) later depend. For an M mark to be scored, the point to which it refers must be seen in a candidate's answer. If a candidate fails to score a particular M mark, then none of the dependent A marks can be scored. 

C marks are compensatory marks in general applicable to numerical questions. These can be scored even if the point to which they refer are not written down by the candidate, provided subsequent working gives evidence that they must have known it. For example, if an equation carries a C mark and the candidate does not write down the actual equation but does correct substitution or working which shows he knew the equation, then the C mark is scored. A C mark is not awarded if a candidate makes two points which contradict each other. Points which are wrong but irrelevant are ignored. 

A marks A marks are accuracy or answer marks which either depend on an M mark, or which are one of the ways which allow a C mark to be scored. A marks are commonly awarded for final answers to numerical questions. If a final numerical answer, eligible for A marks, is correct, with the correct unit and an acceptable number of significant figures, all the marks for that question are normally awarded. It is very occasionally possible to arrive at a correct answer by an entirely wrong approach. In these rare circumstances, do not award the A marks, but award C marks on their merits. An A mark following an M mark is a dependent mark. 

Brackets ( ) Brackets around words or units in the mark scheme are intended to indicate wording used to clarify the mark scheme, but the marks do not depend on seeing the words or units in brackets, e.g. 10 (J) means that the mark is scored for 10, regardless of the unit given. 

Underlining Underlining indicates that this must be seen in the answer offered, or something very similar. 

OR / or This indicates alternative answers, any one of which is satisfactory for scoring the marks. 

e.e.o.o. This means “each error or omission”. 

o.w.t.t.e. This means “or words to that effect”. 

Ignore This indicates that something which is not correct or irrelevant is to be disregarded and does not cause a right plus wrong penalty. 

Spelling Be generous about spelling and use of English. If an answer can be understood to mean what we want, give credit. However, do not allow ambiguities, e.g. spelling which suggests confusion between reflection / refraction / diffraction or thermistor / transistor / transformer. 


 Page 3 Mark Scheme Syllabus Paper Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 0625 42 

 © Cambridge International Examinations 2016 

Not / NOT This indicates that an incorrect answer is not to be disregarded, but cancels another otherwise correct alternative offered by the candidate, i.e. right plus wrong penalty applies. 

ecf meaning “error carried forward” is mainly applicable to numerical questions, but may in particular circumstances be applied in non-numerical questions. This indicates that if a candidate has made an earlier mistake and has carried an incorrect value forward to subsequent stages of working, marks indicated by ecf may be awarded, provided the subsequent working is correct, bearing in mind the earlier mistake. This prevents a candidate from being penalised more than once for a particular mistake, but only applies to marks annotated ecf. Always annotate ecf if applied. 

c.a.o. correct answer only 

Significant Answers are normally acceptable to any number of significant figures ⩾ 2. Any figures exceptions to this general rule will be specified in the mark scheme. 

Units Deduct one mark for each incorrect or missing unit from an answer that would otherwise gain all the marks available for that answer: maximum 1 per question. No deduction is incurred if the unit is missing from the final answer but is shown correctly in the working. 

 Condone wrong use of upper and lower case symbols, e.g. pA for Pa. 

 Derived units are acceptable e.g. N / m^2 for Pa, even kg m / s^2 for N 

Arithmetic errors Deduct one mark if the only error in arriving at a final answer is clearly an arithmetic one. Regard a power-of-ten error as an arithmetic error. 

Transcription Deduct one mark if the only error in arriving at a final answer is because errors previously calculated data has clearly been misread but used correctly. 

Fractions Allow these only where specified in the mark scheme. 

Crossed out work Work which has been crossed out and not replaced but can easily be read, should be marked as if it had not been crossed out. 

Use of NR (# key on the keyboard). Use this if the answer space for a question is completely blank or contains no readable words, figures or symbols. 


Page 4 

Mark Scheme 

Syllabus 

Paper 

 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 

## 0625 

## 42 

 © Cambridge International Examinations 2016 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 1(a) 

 accelerate 

 /^ speed up 

 } any} 

## B2 

 decelerate 

 /^ slow down 

## /^ 

 } two 

 come to rest 

 /^ stop 

 } from 

 change direction 

 /^ path curves 

 } four 

 1(b)(i) 

 a = (v–u) 

 /^ t in any form or (v–u) 

 /^ t 

## C1 

## {(60 – 0) 

## /^ 

 16 or 60 

## /^ 16 = } 3.8 

 m 

 /^ s 

 2 

## A1 

 1(b)(ii) 

 (average speed) = (tot) dist 

 /^ (tot) time 

## C1 

## (100 

## /^ 1.85 = ) 54 

 m 

 /^ s 

## A1 

 1(b)(iii) 

 to reduce (air) resistance 

 /^ drag OR 

 to lower centre of mass 

## B1 

 to increase acceleration 

 /^ speed 

 /^ resultant force OR smaller (frontal) area 

 /^ better aero(dynamic) shape OR to improve 

 stability 

 /^ balance 

## B1 

 Total: 8 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 2(a) 

 momentum = mv 

## C1 

## (=) 30 

## 000 

 kg 

 m 

 /^ s OR N 

 s 

## A1 

 2(b)(i) 

 impulse same as momentum change 

## C1 

## 27 

## 000 

 kg 

 m 

 /^ s OR N 

 s 

## A1 

 2(b)(ii) 

 F= impulse(mom ch) 

 /^ t in any form 

 OR impulse(mom ch) 

 /^ t 

## C1 

## (F=27 

## 000 

## /^ 0.6 = ) 45 

## 000 

## N 

## A1 


Page 5 

Mark Scheme 

Syllabus 

Paper 

 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 

## 0625 

## 42 

 © Cambridge International Examinations 2016 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 2(b)(iii) 

 momentum loss truck A same asmomentum gain truck B 

 /^ impulse 

## C1 

 (final mom truck A=)candidate’s 

 (a) 

- candidate’s 

 (b)(i) 

## C1 

 (v= 3000/6000 =) 0.50 m/s 

## A1 

 Total: 9 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 3(a) 

 internal energy of surroundings 

 Box 4 

 internal energy of wires of motor 

 Box 5 

## B1B1 

 3(b) 

 (change of g.p.e. =) mgh 

## C1 

## (800 

## × 

## 10 

## × 

## 50 = ) 400 

## 000 

## J OR 400 

 kJ 

## A1 

 3(c) 

 electrical energy generated 

 } any 

## B3 

 sensible use of electrical energy 

 } three} } 

 sensible economic comment 

 } from} 

 sensible environmental comment 

 } four 

 Total: 7 


Page 6 

Mark Scheme 

Syllabus 

Paper 

 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 

## 0625 

## 42 

 © Cambridge International Examinations 2016 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 4(a)(i) 

 P = h 

 ρg in any form or h 

 ρg 

## C1 

## (15 

## × 

## 1020 

## × 

## 10 =) 150 

## 000 

 Pa 

## /^150 

 kPa 

## A1 

 4(a)(ii) 

## 250 

## 000 

 Pa 

## /^250 

 kPa 

## B1 

 4(a)(iii) 

 use of P = F 

## /^ 

 A in any form or PA 

## C1 

## (253 

## 000 

## × 

## 1.2 

## × 

## 0.8 =) 240 

## 000 

## N 

## A1 

 4(b) 

 weight of lid 

 } any 

## B2 

 (there is a) pressure inside box 

## } 

 OR upthrust on lid 

 } two 

 moment of force changes 

 } from 

 friction (of hinge) 

 } five 

 drag of water 

## } 

 Total: 7 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 5(a) 

 larger saucepan AND greater area 

## B1 

 5(b) 

 bubbles form 

 } any 

## B1 

 boiling occurs throughout the liquid } 

 one 

 not influenced by surface area 

## /^ 

## } 

 humidity 

 /^ draught 

 } from 

 boiling occurs at one temp 

 } five 

 boiling requires heat 

## } 

 5(c)(i) 

 molecules move apart 

 /^ separate 

 /^ escape NOT move faster 

 /^ more KE 

## B1 

 (intermolecular) forces 

 /^ bonds broken 

 / overcome 

## B1 


Page 7 

Mark Scheme 

Syllabus 

Paper 

 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 

## 0625 

## 42 

 © Cambridge International Examinations 2016 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 5(c)(ii) 

 m = E 

 /^ l 

 v^ 

 in any form or 

## E 

 /^ l 

 v^ 

## C1 

## 920 

## × 

## 300 / 2.3 

## × 

## 10 

 6 

## C1 

## 0.12 

 kg OR 120 

 g 

## A1 

 Total: 7 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 6(a)(i) 

## 35° 

## B1 

 6(a)(ii) 

 sin i 

## /^ 

 sin r = n OR sin i 

 /^ sin r = 1 

 /^ n 

 in any form 

## C1 

 sin r = 1.56 

## × 

 sin 35 OR (sin 35) 

## /^ 1.56 

## C1 

 r = 63° 

## A1 

 6(b)(i) 

 angle of incidence when angle of refraction = 90° 

## B1 

 6(b)(ii) 

 sin c = 1 

 /^ n in any form 

## C1 

 c = 40° 

## A1 

 6(c)(i) 

 refraction 

## B1 

 6(c)(ii) 

 frequency 

 Box 2 only 

## B1 

 Total: 9 


Page 8 

Mark Scheme 

Syllabus 

Paper 

 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 

## 0625 

## 42 

 © Cambridge International Examinations 2016 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 7(a) 

 appropriate use, accept from diagram 

## M1 

 sensible diagram of: X-ray machineand package, luggage etc. 

## A1 

 good extra detail 

## A1 

 7(b) 

 radio waves in air to 

 Box 4 only 

## B1 

 ultrasound in air to 

 Box 1 only 

## B1 

 X-rays in vacuum to 

 Box 4 only 

## B1 

 Total: 6 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 8(a) 

 connect d.c. supply (to terminals 

 /^ circuit) 

## B1 

 switch on 

## B1 

 connect a.c. supply (to terminals 

 /^ circuit) 

## M1 

 withdraw rod from solenoid 

 /^ reduce 

 current 

## A1 

 8(b) 

 Ip 

## V 

 p^ 

## =^ 

 Is 

## V 

 s^ 

## OR ( 

 Is 

## =) 

## I 

 Vp 

 p^ 

## /^ V 

 s^ 

## C1 

## (0.2 

## × 

## 240 

## /^ 12 =) 4.0 (A) 

## A1 

 fuse blows 

 /^ does not blow 

## B1 

 Total: 7 


Page 9 

Mark Scheme 

Syllabus 

Paper 

 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 

## 0625 

## 42 

 © Cambridge International Examinations 2016 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 9(a) 

 ball gets –ve charge (from –ve plate) 

## B1 

 –ve(ly charged ball) attracted to +ve/^ repelled from –ve 

## B1 

 9(b) 

 electrons 

## B1 

 from L to R 

## B1 

 9(c) 

## Q = 

## I 

 t in any form or Q 

 /^ t 

## C1 

 correct use of f = 4 

 Hz or T = 0.25 

 s 

## C1 

## (I 

## =) 3.4 

## × 

## 10 

 –9 

## A 

## A1 

 Total: 7 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 10(a) 

## P=V 

## 2 / 

 R in any form or V 

## 2 / 

## P 

## B1 

## (240 

## 2 / 

## 1000 = ) 58 

## Ω 

## B1 

 10(b) 

## (120 

## 2 / 

## 1000 = ) 14 

## Ω 

## B1 

 10(c) 

## P=V 

## I 

 in any form or P 

## /^ V 

## B1 

## (2000 

## /^ 240 = ) 8.3 

## A 

## B1 

 Total: 5 


Page 10 

Mark Scheme 

Syllabus 

Paper 

 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 

## 0625 

## 42 

 © Cambridge International Examinations 2016 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 11(a) 

 86 protons (in nucleus) 

## B1 

 134 neutrons (in nucleus) 

## B1 

 86 electrons(surrounding nucleus 

 /^ in orbit) 

## B1 

 11(b) 

 4 α 2 

## B1 

 Po .... 84 

## B1 

 Po 216 .... 

## B1 

 11(c) 

## 220 

## /^55 

 or 

 4 (half-lives) 

 or 

## 720 

## /^16 

## C1 

 45 counts 

 /^ s 

## A1 

 Total: 8 


