® IGCSE is the registered trademark of Cambridge International Examinations. 

 This syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 6 printed pages. 

© UCLES 2016 [Turn over 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

PHYSICS 0625/62 

Paper 6 Alternative to Practical May/June 2016 

MARK SCHEME 

Maximum Mark: 40 

 Published 

This mark scheme is published as an aid to teachers and candidates, to indicate the requirements of the examination. It shows the basis on which Examiners were instructed to award marks. It does not indicate the details of the discussions that took place at an Examiners’ meeting before marking began, which would have considered the acceptability of alternative answers. 

Mark schemes should be read in conjunction with the question paper and the Principal Examiner Report for Teachers. 

Cambridge will not enter into discussions about these mark schemes. 

Cambridge is publishing the mark schemes for the May/June 2016 series for most Cambridge IGCSE®, Cambridge International A and AS Level components and some Cambridge O Level components. 


 Page 2 Mark Scheme Syllabus Paper Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 0625 62 

 © Cambridge International Examinations 2016 

## MARK SCHEME ABBREVIATIONS 

Brackets ( ) The word, phrase or unit in brackets is not required but is in the mark scheme for clarification. accept Accept the response. AND Both responses are necessary for the mark to be allowed. NOT This indicates that an incorrect answer is not to be disregarded, but cancels another otherwise correct alternative offered by the candidate, i.e. right plus wrong penalty applies. OR / or This indicates alternative answers, any one of which is satisfactory for scoring the marks. Ignore This indicates that something which is not correct or irrelevant is to be disregarded and does not cause a right plus wrong penalty. Underlining Mark is not allowed unless the underlined word or idea is used by the candidate. c.a.o. Correct answer only. e.e.o.o. This means "each error or omission". o.w.t.t.e. This means “or words to that effect”. ecf meaning "error carried forward" is mainly applicable to numerical questions, but may in particular circumstances be applied in non-numerical questions. This indicates that if a candidate has made an earlier mistake and has carried an incorrect value forward to subsequent stages of working, marks indicated by ecf may be awarded, provided the subsequent working is correct, bearing in mind the earlier mistake. This prevents a candidate from being penalised more than once for a particular mistake, but only applies to marks annotated ecf. Spelling Be generous about spelling and use of English. If an answer can be understood to mean what we want, give credit. Significant figs. Significant figures or decimal places will be penalised only where indicated. Arithmetic errors Deduct one mark if the only error in arriving at a final answer is clearly an arithmetic one. Regard a power-of-ten error as an arithmetic error. Transcription errors Deduct one mark if the only error in arriving at a final answer is because previously calculated data has clearly been misread but used correctly. Any [number] from: accept the [number] of valid responses from list Max Indicates the maximum number of marks Fractions Allow these only where specified in the mark scheme. Crossed out work Work which has been crossed out and not replaced but can easily be read, should be marked as if it had not been crossed out. Use of NR (# key on the keyboard). Use this if the answer space for a question is completely blank or contains no readable words, figures or symbols. 


Page 3 

Mark Scheme 

Syllabus 

Paper 

 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 

## 0625 

## 62 

 © Cambridge International Examinations 2016 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 1(a) 

 l^0 

 = 55 (mm) c.a.o. 

 1(b)(i) 

 4, 9, 14, 19, 23 ecf 

 (a) 

 1(b)(ii) 

 Viewing scale at right angles or use of straight edge 

 /^ set square 

 /^ pointer between bottom of spring and scale 

 /^ ruler 

 1(c) 

 Graph: 

 Axes correctly labelled with quantity and unitSuitable scalesAll plots correct to ½ small squareGood line judgement, thin, continuous line, neat plots 

 1(d)(i) 

 e 

 = 17 (mm) ecf 

 (a) 

 1(d)(ii) 

 method clearly shown on graph W 

 value 3.5–3.75 

 Unit N needed 

 No ecf from 

 (i) 

 Total: 10 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 2(a) 

 x^ 

 shown clearly from centre of 

## P 

 to pivot 

 2(b) 

 Make 

## Q 

 into a cube 

 /^ regular shape 

 /^ small contact area with rule 

 2(c) 

 Move Q or P slowly one way until it just tips, then back other way until it tips back and take middle readingOR repeat procedure 

 /^ experiment 

## AND 

 take average 


Page 4 

Mark Scheme 

Syllabus 

Paper 

 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 

## 0625 

## 62 

 © Cambridge International Examinations 2016 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 2(d) 

 Measure width w of cubePlace w 

 /^ 2 either side of desired position 

 OR draw centre line on cube 

 /^ find centre of mass of cube 

 and mark side of rule in desired positionOR take readings on both sides of the cube andfind the mean 

 2(e) 

 Place rule on pivot (without P and Q) and record 

 /^ find balance point 

 Total: 6 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 3(a) 

 m 

 1 

## =2.94 

 3(b) 

 (m 

 2 

## = 0.329 OR 0.33) 

 m 

 1 

 and 

 m 

 2 

 to 2 or 3 significant figures only 

## AND 

 both 

 m 

 with no unit (accept 

## × 

## )^ 

 3(c) 

 Statement, expect YES. Must match results. e.c.f .allowedJustification to include idea of within (or beyond) limitsof (experimental) accuracy 

 3(d) 

 Any two from: •^ 

 Use of darkened room 

 /^ brighter lamp 

 /^ no other lights 

## •^ 

 Mark position of centre of lens on holder 

-^ 

 Place metre rule on bench (or clamp in position) 

-^ 

 Ensure object and centre of lens are same height from the bench 

-^ 

 Move 

 lens 

 slowly 

## /^ 

 to and fro (when focussing) 

## •^ 

 Lens, object, screen vertical 

 /^ perpendicular to bench 

## •^ 

 Repeat with different D 

-^ 

 Use of graph paper 

 /^ cm scale on screen to measure image 

 max 2 


Page 5 

Mark Scheme 

Syllabus 

Paper 

 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 

## 0625 

## 62 

 © Cambridge International Examinations 2016 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 3(e) 

 image appears well focused over a (small) range of lens positions 

 /^ not all of image focussed at same time 

 /^ relevant reference 

 to chromatic aberration 

 Total: 7 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

## 4 

 Circuit diagram: MP1 

 Sample of wire must be clearly identifiable by a label on the diagram or by letters on the diagram with an explanationin the text 

## MP2 

 All circuit symbols correct (even if circuit is incorrect)Method: 

## MP3 

 Take readings of 

## V 

 and 

## I 

## MP4 

 For 5 or more lengths 

## MP5 

 Range of lengths must be between 5 

 cm and 2 

 m 

 with the largest length at least twice the smallest 

 Table drawn with headings: 

## MP6 

 l^ / 

 m, 

## V 

## /^ V, 

## I 

## /^ A, 

## R 

## /^ 

## Ω 

 Key variables to control: 

## MP7 

 Any one from •^ 

 Material 

 /^ resistivity 

 /^ conductivity 

 /^ type of wire 

## •^ 

 Diameter 

 /^ radius 

 /^ thickness 

 /^ cross sectional area 

## •^ 

 Temperature of wire 

 Total: 7 


Page 6 

Mark Scheme 

Syllabus 

Paper 

 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 

## 0625 

## 62 

 © Cambridge International Examinations 2016 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 5(a)(i) 

 s, °C, °C, °C 

 5(a)(ii) 

## 83(°C) 

 5(b)(i) 

 First box 

## /^ 

 sentence indicated 

 5(b)(ii) 

 Clear reference to readings with examples oftemperature differences 

 5(c) 

 Any two from: •^ 

 Room temperature (or suitable reference to draughts or similar) 

-^ 

 Starting temperature (of water) 

-^ 

 Density of packing 

## /^ 

 amount 

 /^ type of insulation 

## •^ 

 Thickness of lids 

 /^ identical lids 

 max 2 

 5(d) 

 Card or any suitable insulating materialShould be a good insulator 

 /^ poor conductor 

 5(e) 

 Perpendicular viewing 

 /^ view at right angles 

 /^ eye level 

 Reading to bottom of meniscus 

 Total: 10 


