® IGCSE is the registered trademark of Cambridge International Examinations. 

 This syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 11 printed pages. 

© UCLES 2016 [Turn over 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

PHYSICS 0625/41 

Paper 4 Extended Theory May/June 2016 

MARK SCHEME 

Maximum Mark: 80 

 Published 

This mark scheme is published as an aid to teachers and candidates, to indicate the requirements of the examination. It shows the basis on which Examiners were instructed to award marks. It does not indicate the details of the discussions that took place at an Examiners’ meeting before marking began, which would have considered the acceptability of alternative answers. 

Mark schemes should be read in conjunction with the question paper and the Principal Examiner Report for Teachers. 

Cambridge will not enter into discussions about these mark schemes. 

Cambridge is publishing the mark schemes for the May/June 2016 series for most Cambridge IGCSE®, Cambridge International A and AS Level components and some Cambridge O Level components. 


 Page 2 Mark Scheme Syllabus Paper Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 0625 41 

 © Cambridge International Examinations 2016 

## NOTES ABOUT MARK SCHEME SYMBOLS AND OTHER MATTERS 

M marks are method marks upon which further marks depend. For an M mark to be scored, the point to which it refers must be seen in a candidate's answer. If a candidate fails to score a particular M mark, then none of the dependent marks can be scored. 

B marks: are independent marks, which do not depend on other marks. For a B mark to scored, the point to which it refers must be seen specifically in the candidate’s answers. 

A marks In general A marks are awarded for final answers to numerical questions. If a final numerical answer, eligible for A marks, is correct, with the correct unit and an acceptable number of significant figures, all the marks for that question are normally awarded. 

 It is very occasionally possible to arrive at a correct answer by an entirely wrong approach. In these rare circumstances, do not award the A marks, but award C marks on their merits. However, correct numerical answers with no working shown gain all the marks available. 

C marks are compensatory marks in general applicable to numerical questions. These can be scored even if the point to which they refer are not written down by the candidate, provided subsequent working gives evidence that they must have known it. For example, if an equation carries a C mark and the candidate does not write down the actual equation but does correct substitution or working which shows he knew the equation, then the C mark is scored A C marks is not awarded if a candidate makes two points which contradict each other. Points which are wrong but irrelevant are ignored. 

brackets ( ) around words or units in the mark scheme are intended to indicate wording used to clarify the mark scheme, but the marks do not depend on seeing the words or units in brackets. e.g. 10 (J) means that the mark is scored for 10, regardless of the unit given. 

underlining indicates that this must be seen in the answer offered, or something very similar. 

OR / or indicates alternative answers, any one of which is satisfactory for scoring the marks. 

e.e.o.o. means "each error or omission". 

o.w.t.t.e. means “or words to that effect”. 

Spelling Be generous about spelling and use of English. If an answer can be understood to mean what we want, give credit. However, beware of and do not allow ambiguities, accidental or deliberate: e.g. spelling which suggests confusion between reflection / refraction / diffraction / thermistor / transistor / transformer. 

Not/NOT Indicates that an incorrect answer is not to be disregarded, but cancels another otherwise correct alternative offered by the candidate i.e. right plus wrong penalty applies. 

Ignore Indicates that something which is not correct or irrelevant is to be disregarded and does not cause a right plus wrong penalty. 


 Page 3 Mark Scheme Syllabus Paper Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 0625 41 

 © Cambridge International Examinations 2016 

ecf meaning "error carried forward" is mainly applicable to numerical questions, but may in particular circumstances be applied in non-numerical questions. This indicates that if a candidate has made an earlier mistake and has carried an incorrect value forward to subsequent stages of working, marks indicated by ecf may be awarded, provided the subsequent working is correct, bearing in mind the earlier mistake. This prevents a candidate being penalised more than once for a particular mistake, but only applies to marks annotated ecf. 

Significant Answers are normally acceptable to any number of significant figures ≥ 2. Any Figures exceptions to this general rule will be specified in the mark scheme. 

Units Deduct one mark for each incorrect or missing unit from an answer that would otherwise gain all the marks available for that answer: maximum 1 per question. No deduction is incurred if the unit is missing from the final answer but is shown correctly in the working. 

Arithmetic errors Deduct one mark if the only error in arriving at a final answer is clearly an arithmetic one. 

Transcription Deduct one mark if the only error in arriving at a final answer is because given or errors previously calculated data has clearly been misread but used correctly.. 

Fractions (e.g. ½) Allow these only where specified in the mark scheme. 

Crossed out work Work which has been crossed out and not replaced but can easily be read, should be marked as if it had not been crossed out. 

Use of NR (# key on the keyboard) Use this if the answer space for a question is completely blank or contains no readable words, figures or symbols. 


Page 4 

Mark Scheme 

Syllabus 

Paper 

 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 

## 0625 

## 41 

 © Cambridge International Examinations 2016 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Mark 

 1(a) 

 From time zero, line of constant positive gradient, not necessarily from originHorizontal line from end of sloping lineLine of steeper positive gradient from end of horizontal line 

## B1B1B1 

 1(b) 

 (distance =) area under graph stated0.5 

## × 

## 7.5 

## × 

## 3.3 (= 12.375) 

## + 12.5 

## × 

## 3.3 (= 41.25) 

## + 0.5 

## × 

## 5 

## × 

## 3.3 (= 8.25) 

 OR ½ (a + b)h= 0.5 

## × 

## (25 + 12.5) 

## × 

## 3.3 

## OR (25 

## × 

## 3.3) – (0.5 

## × 

## 12.5 

## × 

## 3.3) 

## 62 

 m 

## C1 C2 

## (C1)(C1)(C2) 

## A1 

 Total: 7 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Mark 

 2(a)(i) 

 (momentum =) mv OR 70 

## × 

## 20 

## = 1400 

 kg 

 m 

 /^ s OR N 

 s 

## C1A1 

 2(a)(ii) 

 same numerical answer as 

 (a)(i) 

 with either unit OR 1400 

 kg 

 m 

 /^ s 

## B1 

 2(b) 

 (a = ) change of velocity 

 /^ time OR (v – u) 

 /t 

## OR 20 

## /^ 

## 0.2 

## 100 

 m 

 /^ s 

 2 

## C1A1 

 2(c) 

 (F =) ma OR 70 

## × 

## 80 

## 5600 

## N 

## C1A1 

 2(d) 

 Force 

 /^ impact on passenger or dummy less (than without seat belt 

 /^ airbag) 

 Passenger less likely to be injured 

 /^ hurt 

 /^ damaged 

## M1A1 


Page 5 

Mark Scheme 

Syllabus 

Paper 

 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 

## 0625 

## 41 

 © Cambridge International Examinations 2016 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Mark Total: 9 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Mark 

 3(a)(i) 

 (P =) hdg OR 1.5 

## × 

## 850 

## × 

## 10 

 ORmg / area of base OR 850 

## × 

## 2.4 

## × 

## 1.5 

## × 

## 1.5 

## × 

## 10 / (2.4 

## × 

## 1.5) 

 13 000 Pa or N/m 

 2 

## C1 

## (C1) 

## A1 

 3(a)(ii) 

## P = F/A OR (F =) PA OR 12 750 

## × 

## 1.5 

## × 

## 2.4 OR 12 750 

## × 

## 3.6 

 46 000 NOR(Force = ) weight of oil = mg = 2.4 

## × 

## 1.5 

## × 

## 1.5 

## × 

## 850 

## × 

## 10 

## 46 

## 000 

## N 

## C1A1 

## (C1)(A1) 

 3(b) 

## (46000 / 10 = ) 4600 

 kg 

 OR m = Vd = (2.4 

## × 

## 1.5 

## × 

## 1.5) 

## × 

## 850 = 4600 

 kg 

## B1 

 3(c)(i) 

 (density of brass) greater than that of oil 

## /^850 

 kg 

 /^ m 

 3 

 OR brass denser than oil 

## B1 

 3(c)(ii) 

 (It won’t sink as average) density of wood + key less than density of oil 

## B1 

 Total: 7 


Page 6 

Mark Scheme 

Syllabus 

Paper 

 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 

## 0625 

## 41 

 © Cambridge International Examinations 2016 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Mark 

 4(a) 

 Gas molecules (very) far apart OR empty space between gas moleculesMolecules of liquid (very) close together 

 /^ compact OR are touching (each other) 

## B1B1 

 4(b)(i) 

 Faster 

 /^ more energetic water molecules evaporate 

 /^ escape 

 /^ leave 

 Slower 

 /^ less energetic molecules remain (so temperature is lower) 

## B1B1 

 4(b)(ii) 

 Water in wide container AND has water with larger surface (area)Rate of evaporation higher 

 /^ faster 

 /^ quicker 

 OR higher chance of evaporation 

## B1 B1 

 Total: 6 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Mark 

 5(a) 

 One of 1, 2 or 3: 1 

 Molecules move faster OR have more k.e. 

 /^ momentum 

## 2 

 Molecules hit walls more often 

 /^ more frequently 

## 3 

 Molecules hit walls with greater force 

 /^ impulse 

 /^ harder 

## B1 

 5(b) 

 1 mark for each of 1, 2 and 3 in 

 (a) 

 not given as answer to 

 (a) 

## B2 

 5(c)(i) 

 PV = constant OR P 

## V 1 

## = P 1 

## V 2 

## OR 98 2 

## × 

## 4800 = P 

## × 

## 7200 

## 65 

 kPa 

## C1A1 

 5(c)(ii) 

 To prevent the balloon bursting (as its volume increases)OR to reduce the pressure inside the balloonOR pressure difference between inside and outside balloon rises 

## B1 

 Total: 6 


Page 7 

Mark Scheme 

Syllabus 

Paper 

 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 

## 0625 

## 41 

 © Cambridge International Examinations 2016 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Mark 

 6(a) 

 Method 1:Long distance 

 /^ distance in field measured with the tape 

 One student fires pistol at one end (of this distance)Student at other end starts stop-watch on seeing smoke 

 /^ light 

 from pistol and st 

## / 

 ops stop-watch on hearing sound of pistolspeed = (measured) distance 

## /^ 

 (measured) time 

 Method 2:Distance of 50 

 m or more from a vertical wall measured with 

 the tapeStudent 1 fires pistol at this distance from the wallStudent 2 standing next to student 1 starts stop-watch onhearing pistol and stops stop-watch on hearing echospeed = 2 

## × 

 (measured) distance 

 /^ (measured) time 

## B1B1 B1B1 

## (B1)(B1)(B1)(B1) 

 6(b)(i) 

 v = f 

 λ^ 

## OR ( 

 λ^ 

 = ) v 

 /^ f OR 1500 

## /^200 

## 7.5 

 m 

## C1A1 

 6(b)(ii) 

## 1 

 (frequency) does not change 

 2 

 (speed) decreases 

## B1B1 

 Total: 8 


Page 8 

Mark Scheme 

Syllabus 

Paper 

 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 

## 0625 

## 41 

 © Cambridge International Examinations 2016 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Mark 

 7(a)((i) 

 Sketch of curved optic fibre with light ray undergoing at least one total internal reflection 

## B1 

 7(a)(ii) 

 Light travels down (optic) fibres into or out of bodyTo examine internal organ 

 /^ part 

 Light travels both ways into and out of bodyORTo destroy (cancerous) cellsby heatingOREndoscope 

 /^ fibre bundle inserted into body 

 To view internal organ body part OR for keyhole surgery 

## B1 B1B1 

## (B1)(B1)(B1)(B1) 

 7(b) 

 Light in air: 

## 3 

## ×^ 

## 10 

 8 m 

 /^ s 

 Microwaves in vacuum: 

## 3 

## ×^ 

## 10 

 8 m 

 /^ s 

 Sound in steel: 

## 6000 

 m 

 /^ s 

## B1B1B1 

 7(c) 

 n = speed in air 

 /^ speed in glass (or rearranged) 

## OR 1.5 = 3 

## × 

## 10 

## 8 / 

 speed in glass (or rearranged) 

## 2.0 

## × 

## 10 

 8 m 

 /^ s 

## C1A1 

 Total: 9 


Page 9 

Mark Scheme 

Syllabus 

Paper 

 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 

## 0625 

## 41 

 © Cambridge International Examinations 2016 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Mark 

 8(a)(i) 

 Magnetic field at Y: ‘towards the bottom of the page’ tickedForce at Y: ‘to the left’ ticked 

## B1B1 

 8(a)(ii) 

 There is a force on Xbecause of the (magnetic) field caused by YOR due to the (magnetic) field around 

 /^ of Y 

 OR the (magnetic) fields due to X and Y interacting 

## B1 

 8(b) 

 Change in current 

 /^ field is brief 

 /^ for short time 

 /^ occurs as switch 

 closesChanging magnetic field 

 /^ flux links with secondary coil 

 /^ other 

 coil 

 /^ core OR field 

## /^ 

 flux lines cut coil 

 Causes induced voltage 

 /^ current 

## B1 B1B1 

 Total: 6 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Mark 

 9(a)(i) 

## 12 

## Ω 

## B1 

 9(a)(ii) 

## 1 

## /^ R = 1 

## /^ 

## R 

## + 1 1 

## /^ R 

 2 

## OR 1 

## /^ R = 1 

## /^ 12 + 1 

## /^6 

## OR (R = ) R 

## R 1 

## / 2 

## (R 

## + R 1 

## ) OR (12 2 

## × 

## 6) 

## /^ (12 + 6) 

## 4 

## Ω 

## C1A1 

 9(a)(iii) 

## 4 + 6 = 10 

## Ω 

## B1 

 9(b)(i) 

## (I 

## = 12 

## /^ 10 = ) 1.2 

## A 

## B1 

 9(b)(ii) 

## (E =) 

## I 

 Vt OR 1.2 

## × 

## 12 

## × 

## 50 OR 

## I 

 2 Rt OR 1.2 

## 2 × 

## 10 

## × 

## 50 

## OR V 

 2 t^ 

## /^ R OR 12 

 2 

## ×^ 

## 50 

## /^10 

## 720 

## J 

## C1A1 

 Total: 7 


Page 10 

Mark Scheme 

Syllabus 

Paper 

 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 

## 0625 

## 41 

 © Cambridge International Examinations 2016 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Mark 

 10(a)(i) 

 Light emitting diode OR LED 

## B1 

 10(a)(ii) 

## B1 

 10(b) 

 column C 

 column E 

## 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 

## 0 1 0 1 0 1 1 1 

## B3 

 10(c) 

 Replace the OR gate with an AND gate 

## B1 

 Total: 6 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Mark 

 11(a) 

 83 protons131 neutrons 

## B2 

 11(b) 

 0 β^1 −^ Superscript 0Subscript –1 21484 

 Po 

## B1B1 B1 

 11(c) 

 (After 20 min count rate is) 360 

 /^ 2 or 180 (count 

 /^ s) 

 (After 40 min count rate is) 180 

 /^ 2 or 90 (counts 

 /^ s) 

 (After 60 min count rate is) 90 

## /^2 

 OR new count-rate = 360/(2 

## × 

## 2 

## × 

 2) or 360 

 /^ 8 or 3 half-lives 

 45 (counts 

 /^ s) 

## C1A1 


Page 11 

Mark Scheme 

Syllabus 

Paper 

 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 

## 0625 

## 41 

 © Cambridge International Examinations 2016 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Mark 

 11(d) 

 Any two points chosen from the lists below:(economic):high cost of storage 

 /^ shielding 

 /^ guarding 

 /^ need to store for a 

 long timeOR reduction in tourismOR loss of farming produce 

## /^ 

 land 

 OR reduction of land 

 /^ property values 

 (social):fear of cancer 

 /^ causes cancer 

 /^ genetic mutations 

 /^ radiation 

 sickness in people 

 /^ animals 

 OR local objectionsOR cause people to move away(environmental):crop mutationsOR leakage into water suppliesOR pollution of atmosphere 

 /^ water supply 

## B2 

 Total: 9 


