 This syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. 

 IB18 06_0610_13/3RP © UCLES 2018 [Turn over 

## *0433363336* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

### BIOLOGY 0610/13 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) May/June 2018 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2018 0610/13/M/J/18 

**1** Which organisms carry out respiration, growth, movement and excretion? 

 A all animals and all plants 

 B animals only 

 C arthropods and flowering plants only 

 D plants only 

**2** The diagram shows an animal whose scientific name is _Falco peregrinus_. 

 To which species does it belong? 

 A bird 

 B F. peregrinus 

 C Falco 

 D vertebrate 

**3** What kind of skin do amphibians have? 

 A dry without scales 

 B dry with scales 

 C moist without scales 

 D moist with scales 


© UCLES 2018 0610/13/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**4** The diagram shows a flowering plant. 

 Use the key to identify the plant. 

 flower has four petals 

 plant 

 leaves with jagged edges 

 leaves with smooth edges 

### A B 

 flower has five petals 

 leaves with jagged edges 

 leaves with smooth edges 

### C D 

**5** The diagram shows a plant cell. 

 In which labelled part of the cell is sugar made? 

 D cell wall 

### A 

 vacuole 

### B 

 chloroplast 

### C 

 nucleus 


© UCLES 2018 0610/13/M/J/18 

**6** Why do some root cells have root hairs? 

 A for the maintenance of the temperature of the cell sap 

 B to increase the surface area of the cells 

 C to increase the volume of the cell sap 

 D to provide a place for cell nuclei 

**7** The diagram shows a section through an alveolus and through a capillary. 

 capillary wall 

 low carbon dioxide concentration 

 high carbon dioxide concentration 

 capillary 

 red blood cells 

 wall of alveolus air 

# X 

# Y 

 How does carbon dioxide move from Y to X? 

 A by diffusion 

 B by osmosis 

 C by translocation 

 D by transpiration 

**8** Which part of a plant root hair is partially permeable? 

 A the cell sap 

 B the cell surface membrane 

 C the cell vacuole 

 D the cell wall 


© UCLES 2018 0610/13/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**9** The table shows the results of food tests carried out on a fruit. 

 test Benedict’s biuret ethanol iodine 

 result positive positive negative negative 

 What did the fruit contain? 

 A fat and reducing sugar 

 B fat and starch 

 C protein and reducing sugar 

 D protein and starch 

**10** An experiment was carried out to investigate the effect of pH on enzyme action. The graph shows the results. 

 y-axis 

 x-axis 

 What are the labels for the x-axis and the y-axis? 

 x-axis y-axis 

 A pH rate of reaction 

 B pH time 

 C rate of reaction pH 

 D time pH 


© UCLES 2018 0610/13/M/J/18 

**11** The diagram shows a section through a leaf. 

### S R 

### P 

### Q 

 What are structures P, Q, R and S? 

### P Q R S 

 A chloroplast phloem palisade tissue xylem 

 B cuticle xylem chloroplast stoma 

 C phloem palisade tissue cuticle stoma 

 D xylem chloroplast phloem cuticle 

**12** A lack of which dietary component can result in constipation? 

 A fat 

 B fibre (roughage) 

 C carbohydrate 

 D protein 

**13** A woman requires more calcium in her diet when she is pregnant. 

 Which statement explains why? 

 A bone growth in the fetus 

 B muscle growth in the fetus 

 C production of haemoglobin in the fetus 

 D to provide energy for the fetus 


© UCLES 2018 0610/13/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**14** The diagram shows part of the alimentary canal. 

 J 

### K 

### L 

### M 

 Which row correctly identifies the structures labelled J to M? 

### J K L M 

 A oesophagus pancreas small intestine stomach 

 B pancreas small intestine stomach oesophagus 

 C small intestine stomach oesophagus pancreas 

 D stomach oesophagus pancreas small intestine 

**15** The diagram shows the pathway of water from the soil through a plant. 

 soil → X → Y → Z → mesophyll cells 

 Which cells are represented by X, Y and Z? 

### X Y Z 

 A root hair cells root cortex cells xylem 

 B root hair cells xylem root cortex cells 

 C xylem root cortex cells root hair cells 

 D xylem root hair cells root cortex cells 

**16** What will **not** affect the rate of transpiration? 

 A humidity of the atmosphere 

 B number of open stomata 

 C rate of respiration 

 D temperature 


© UCLES 2018 0610/13/M/J/18 

**17** The diagram shows the human heart. 

### R 

### P Q 

### S 

 In which order does blood pass through the chambers during a complete circuit of the body after it returns from the lungs? 

 A Q → R → S → P 

 B Q → R → P → S 

 C P → S → Q → R 

 D P → S → R → Q 

**18** The diagrams show some components of the blood of a mammal. 

 Which component causes the blood to start clotting? 

 A B C D 

**19** What is an indirect method of transmitting disease? 

 A body fluid 

 B blood 

 C food 

 D skin contact between people 


© UCLES 2018 0610/13/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**20** A sample of expired air is collected in a gas jar. Another gas jar contains normal atmospheric air. 

 A lighted candle is placed inside each gas jar as shown. The time taken for each flame to go out is measured. As the candles burn they use up the oxygen available in the jar. 

 gas jar X gas jar Y 

 lid 

 air sample 

 candle 

 The table shows the results of this experiment. 

 gas jar 

 time for candle flame to go out / s 

### X 15 

### Y 9 

 What is an explanation of the difference between the results in jars X and Y? 

 A Jar X contains atmospheric air which has more carbon dioxide. 

 B Jar X contains expired air which has more carbon dioxide. 

 C Jar Y contains atmospheric air which has less oxygen. 

 D Jar Y contains expired air which has less oxygen. 

**21** Which row describes anaerobic respiration? 

 energy released 

 oxygen required 

 waste products 

 A a little no lactic acid 

 B a little yes carbon dioxide and water 

 C a lot no lactic acid 

 D a lot yes carbon dioxide and water 


© UCLES 2018 0610/13/M/J/18 

**22** The diagram shows the excretory system. 

### X 

 What is structure X? 

 A bladder 

 B kidney 

 C ureter 

 D urethra 

**23** What is the correct sequence in a reflex action? 

 A receptor → stimulus → motor neurone → relay neurone → sensory neurone → effector 

 B receptor → stimulus → sensory neurone → relay neurone → motor neurone → effector 

 C stimulus → receptor → motor neurone → relay neurone → sensory neurone → effector 

 D stimulus → receptor → sensory neurone → relay neurone → motor neurone → effector 

**24** In 1921, Banting and Best extracted a substance from the pancreas of an animal. The substance was injected into children whose blood sugar concentrations were too high. The children’s blood sugar concentrations were returned to normal. 

 Which substance in the pancreatic extract would return the children’s blood sugar concentrations to normal? 

 A adrenaline 

 B insulin 

 C glucose 

 D oestrogen 


© UCLES 2018 0610/13/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**25** A seed is placed and grown on a rotating disc, as shown. 

 seed pinned to disc 

 Which diagram shows the appearance of the seedling shoot after seven days? 

 A B C D 

**26** Which organ is the site of break down of alcohol in the human body? 

 A bladder 

 B kidney 

 C liver 

 D stomach 

**27** Alcohol is a drug. 

 Which statement is correct? 

 A It can cause COPD. 

 B It is a depressant. 

 C It is not addictive. 

 D It speeds up reaction times. 

**28** The following statements give information about the reproduction of different organisms. 

 1 Daffodil plants produce genetically identical bulbs that grow into a new plant the following year. 

 2 In summer, female aphids produce genetically identical offspring without fertilisation by a male. 

 3 Most banana plants are genetically identical because they were produced from one parent plant. 

 Which statements are examples of asexual reproduction? 

 A 1, 2 and 3 B 1 and 2 only C 1 and 3 only D 2 and 3 only 


© UCLES 2018 0610/13/M/J/18 

**29** Which stages in sexual reproduction occur in both flowering plants and human reproduction? 

 1 Gametes are made by meiosis. 

 2 Gametes fuse to form a zygote. 

 3 The male gamete moves to the female gamete. 

 A 1, 2 and 3 B 1 and 2 only C 1 only D 2 and 3 only 

**30** Which part of the female reproductive system produces oestrogen? 

 A cervix 

 B ovary 

 C oviduct 

 D uterus 

**31** Which hormone is responsible for the development of secondary sexual characteristics? 

 A FSH 

 B LH 

 C oestrogen 

 D progesterone 

**32** A length of DNA codes for a protein. 

 What is this a definition of? 

 A a gene 

 B an amino acid 

 C an X chromosome 

 D a Y chromosome 


© UCLES 2018 0610/13/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**33** The diagrams show human male and female reproductive organs. 

### P 

### Q 

### R 

### X 

### Y 

### Z 

 Where does meiosis take place? 

 A P and X B Q and X C Q and Y D R and Z 

**34** The bar chart shows the heights of pea plants grown from 500 pea seeds. 

 number of pea plants 

 height of plants 

 What variation do the plants show? 

 continuous discontinuous 

 A   

 B   

 C   

 D   


© UCLES 2018 0610/13/M/J/18 

**35** The picture shows a fox that lives in the desert. 

 Which adaptation does the fox have for living in the desert? 

 A eyes at front of head to help judge distance 

 B large ears to increase heat loss 

 C long bushy tail for balance 

 D sharp teeth to catch prey 

**36** The diagram shows a simple food chain. 

 green plants chickens wild dogs 

### 1 2 3 

 Which process releases the energy that is lost at 1, 2 and 3? 

 A ingestion 

 B photosynthesis 

 C respiration 

 D transpiration 


© UCLES 2018 0610/13/M/J/18 

**37** Which labelled stage in the water cycle shows precipitation? 

 land sea river 

### A 

### B 

### D 

 plant roots 

### C 

**38** What is the name of the structure that separates the left and right ventricles of the heart? 

 A atrium 

 B septum 

 C vena cava 

 D valve 

**39** What is a source of air pollution? 

 A herbicides 

 B methane 

 C untreated sewage 

 D water vapour 

**40** Which process does **not** change the carbon dioxide level in the air? 

 A decomposition 

 B feeding 

 C photosynthesis 

 D respiration 


### BLANK PAGE 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2018 0610/13/M/J/18 


