 This syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 16 printed pages. 

 IB18 06_0610_22/2RP © UCLES 2018 [Turn over 

# *1751718756 

# * 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## BIOLOGY 0610/22 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) May/June 2018 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2018 0610/22/M/J/18 

**1** Which organisms carry out respiration, growth, movement and excretion? 

 A all animals and all plants 

 B animals only 

 C arthropods and flowering plants only 

 D plants only 

**2** The diagram shows an animal whose scientific name is _Falco peregrinus_. 

 To which species does it belong? 

 A bird 

 B F. peregrinus 

 C Falco 

 D vertebrate 

**3** What kind of skin do amphibians have? 

 A dry without scales 

 B dry with scales 

 C moist without scales 

 D moist with scales 


© UCLES 2018 0610/22/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**4** The diagram shows a flowering plant. 

 Use the key to identify the plant. 

 flower has four petals 

 plant 

 leaves with jagged edges 

 leaves with smooth edges 

## A B 

 flower has five petals 

 leaves with jagged edges 

 leaves with smooth edges 

## C D 

**5** In which part of the cell does aerobic respiration occur? 

 A cytoplasm 

 B mitochondrion 

 C ribosome 

 D vesicle 

**6** Why do some root cells have root hairs? 

 A for the maintenance of the temperature of the cell sap 

 B to increase the surface area of the cells 

 C to increase the volume of the cell sap 

 D to provide a place for cell nuclei 


© UCLES 2018 0610/22/M/J/18 

**7** The table shows the concentration of gases in a blood vessel and in an alveolus. 

 Which row shows the conditions that cause a gas produced in respiration to diffuse from the blood vessel into the alveolus? 

 gas produced 

 concentration in the blood vessel 

 concentration in the alveolus 

 A carbon dioxide low high 

 B carbon dioxide high low 

 C oxygen low high 

 D oxygen high low 

**8** Which part of a plant root hair is partially permeable? 

 A the cell sap 

 B the cell surface membrane 

 C the cell vacuole 

 D the cell wall 

**9** The table shows the results of food tests carried out on a fruit. 

 test Benedict’s biuret ethanol iodine 

 result positive positive negative negative 

 What did the fruit contain? 

 A fat and reducing sugar 

 B fat and starch 

 C protein and reducing sugar 

 D protein and starch 


© UCLES 2018 0610/22/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**10** An experiment was carried out to investigate the effect of pH on enzyme action. The graph shows the results. 

 y-axis 

 x-axis 

 What are the labels for the x-axis and the y-axis? 

 x-axis y-axis 

 A pH rate of reaction 

 B pH time 

 C rate of reaction pH 

 D time pH 


© UCLES 2018 0610/22/M/J/18 

**11** An experiment is set up as shown. 

 test-tube X 

 small plant 

 gauze platform 

 green indicator 

 test-tube Y 

 The green indicator turns yellow when the concentration of carbon dioxide increases. The green indicator turns blue when the concentration of carbon dioxide decreases. 

 After several hours, the indicator in test-tube X turned blue. The indicator in test-tube Y remained green. 

 Which process caused the colour change? 

 A germination 

 B photosynthesis 

 C respiration 

 D transpiration 

**12** Why do plants need nitrate ions? 

 A for making amino acids 

 B for making fatty acids 

 C for making glucose 

 D for making starch 

**13** In which part of the alimentary canal do chemical digestion and mechanical digestion take place? 

 A colon 

 B duodenum 

 C mouth 

 D oesophagus 


© UCLES 2018 0610/22/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**14** The diagram shows part of the alimentary canal. 

 Where is most water absorbed? 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 

**15** A celery stalk was placed in a beaker which contained a red stain. After 24 hours, the red stain appeared at the top of the celery stalk. 

 Which structures stained red? 

 A cortex cells 

 B mesophyll cells 

 C phloem 

 D xylem 

**16** A student is investigating the effect of temperature on the rate of transpiration. 

 Which environmental conditions should be kept constant during this investigation? 

 humidity light intensity temperature wind speed 

 A     

 B     

 C     

 D     


© UCLES 2018 0610/22/M/J/18 

**17** A student places two samples of crushed apple into two beakers, P and Q. The samples are of equal size. She adds 5 cm^3 of pectinase solution to beaker P and 5 cm^3 of water to beaker Q. 

 After five minutes, she places the samples of crushed apple into two different filter funnels, and measures the volume of juice filtering through from each sample over a period of 10 minutes. 

 Which graph shows her results? 

## 0 

## 0 

total volume of juice filtered through 

 time 

## A 

## Q 

## P 

## 0 

## 0 

 total volume of juice filtered through 

 time 

## B 

## P 

## Q 

## 0 

## 0 

total volume of juice filtered through 

 time 

## C 

## Q 

## P 

## 0 

## 0 

 total volume of juice filtered through 

 time 

## D 

## Q 

## P 

**18** During the process of blood clotting, damage to blood vessels stimulates L, and M is converted to N. 

 What are L, M and N? 

## L M N 

 A fibrin platelets fibrinogen 

 B fibrinogen platelets fibrin 

 C platelets fibrin fibrinogen 

 D platelets fibrinogen fibrin 


© UCLES 2018 0610/22/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**19** A child is vaccinated against measles. After a period of time the child is infected with the measles virus. 

 The graph shows the concentration of measles antibodies in the child’s bloodstream during this time. 

 antibody concentration in the blood 

 time 

 Which statement is consistent with the information in the graph? 

 A After the vaccination, the child produced memory cells. 

 B The child had passive immunity against measles. 

 C The measles virus contains antibodies. 

 D The vaccination failed to protect the child against measles. 

**20** Muscles are responsible for the ventilation of the lungs during breathing. 

 Which row describes their action during the inspiration of air? 

 diaphragm muscles 

 external intercostal muscles 

 internal intercostal muscles 

 A contract contract relax 

 B contract relax contract 

 C relax contract relax 

 D relax relax contract 


© UCLES 2018 0610/22/M/J/18 

**21** Aerobic respiration involves the break down of glucose. 

 C 6 H 12 O 6 + ...x...O 2 → ...y...H 2 O + ...z...CO 2 + energy 

 Which values for x, y and z balance the equation? 

 x y z 

 A 6 4 6 

 B 6 6 6 

 C 6 12 6 

 D 12 12 12 

**22** The composition of the blood in the renal vein is different to the composition of the blood in the renal artery. 

 What substance has a higher concentration in the renal vein than in the renal artery? 

 A carbon dioxide 

 B glucose 

 C oxygen 

 D urea 

**23** The diagram shows the structures in a reflex arc. 

 receptor 

 muscle 

## X 

 What is X? 

 A effector 

 B relay neurone 

 C sensory neurone 

 D synapse 


© UCLES 2018 0610/22/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**24** Which row describes accommodation when viewing a near object? 

 ciliary muscles suspensoryligaments lens shape 

 A contracted slackened more spherical 

 B contracted tight more spherical 

 C relaxed slackened less spherical 

 D relaxed tight more spherical 

**25** Hormones and the nervous system both control our bodies. 

 Which statement about the control provided by our hormones is correct? 

 A fast response and long lasting 

 B fast response and short lived 

 C slow response and long lasting 

 D slow response and short lived 

**26** Which row describes heroin? 

 type of drug location of effect 

 A depressant blood 

 B depressant synapses 

 C stimulant blood 

 D stimulant synapses 

**27** What is an advantage, for an organism, of using asexual reproduction? 

 A Disease spreads rapidly. 

 B It does not cause variation. 

 C It easily adapts to environmental change. 

 D Population increases rapidly. 

**28** The diploid number in _Ovis aries_ (sheep) is 54. 

 How many chromosomes will there be in a zygote of this species? 

 A 0 B 27 C 54 D 108 


© UCLES 2018 0610/22/M/J/18 

**29** Which adaptive feature of sperm provides the energy that enables it to swim? 

 A the acrosome 

 B the cell membrane 

 C the flagellum 

 D the mitochondria 

**30** Two hormones, X and Y, are secreted by the ovaries. The graph shows the concentrations of these hormones in the blood during one complete menstrual cycle. 

 concentration of hormone in the blood 

 time / days 

## 0 7 14 21 28 

## X Y 

 What are hormones X and Y? 

 hormone X hormone Y 

 A FSH LH 

 B LH FSH 

 C oestrogen progesterone 

 D progesterone oestrogen 


© UCLES 2018 0610/22/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**31** The mitotic index of a tissue is the percentage of cells in a tissue that are undergoing division. 

 The table shows the number of cells in two tissue samples, X and Y. 

 tissue sample 

 number of cells undergoing mitosis 

 number of cells not undergoing mitosis 

 total number of cells in the tissue sample 

 X 25 55 80 

 Y 15 95 110 

 Which statement is correct? 

 A Tissue X is growing faster with a mitotic index of 31.3%. 

 B Tissue X is growing faster with a mitotic index of 45.4%. 

 C Tissue Y is growing faster with a mitotic index of 13.6%. 

 D Tissue Y is growing faster with a mitotic index of 15.8%. 

**32** Some features of cell division are listed. 

 1 haploid cells are produced 

 2 new cells are genetically identical 

 3 reduction division 

 4 results in variation 

 Which features would be associated with meiosis? 

 A 1, 2 and 3 B 1, 2 and 4 C 1, 3 and 4 D 2, 3 and 4 

**33** Sickle-cell anaemia is an inherited disease. 

 parental genotypes 

## 1 × 2 

 gametes HbS^ HbA^ HbA^ HbA 

## 3 4 5 6 

 offspring genotypes 

 Which genotypes represented in the diagram would increase an individual’s resistance to malaria? 

 A 1, 3 and 4 B 1, 4 and 5 C 2, 3 and 4 D 2, 5 and 6 


© UCLES 2018 0610/22/M/J/18 

**34** Fitness is defined as the probability of an organism «« 1 «« and «« 2 «« in the environment in which it is found. 

 Which words correctly complete gaps 1 and 2? 

## 1 2 

 A photosynthesising respiring 

 B reproducing respiring 

 C surviving reproducing 

 D surviving photosynthesising 

**35** A food chain has the pyramid of numbers shown. 

 carnivorous insects 

 herbivorous insects 

 producer 

 What is the pyramid of biomass for the same food chain? 

 A B 

## C D 


© UCLES 2018 0610/22/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**36** The graph shows the changes in a population of brine shrimp over a period of time. 

 number of brine shrimp 

 time 

## 0 

## 0 

## 1 2 3 

 Over which section or sections is the birth rate greater than the death rate? 

 A 1, 2 and 3 B 1 and 2 only C 1 only D 2 only 

**37** What is a disadvantage of using bacteria to produce human insulin? 

 A few ethical concerns 

 B genetic code shared with other organisms 

 C they contain plasmids 

 D they mutate frequently 

**38** The diagram shows a bacterial cell containing a plasmid. 

 plasmid 

 What is inserted into the plasmid if this cell is to be used for the production of insulin? 

 A a length of DNA from a human 

 B a length of DNA from another bacterium 

 C a molecule of insulin 

 D an enzyme 

**39** What would be unlikely to increase the risk of human famine? 

 A a rapidly increasing human population 

 B flooding of land 

 C lack of rain causing a drought 

 D the use of pesticides on crops 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2018 0610/22/M/J/18 

**40** Since 1970 sulfur dioxide emissions have dropped by 95% in some parts of the world. 

 What is the main reason for the reduction in emissions? 

 A fewer coal-powered power stations 

 B increase in wind turbines 

 C less cars on the road 

 D less industry 


