 This syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 16 printed pages. 

 IB18 06_0610_12/2RP © UCLES 2018 [Turn over 

# *1276425606 

# * 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## BIOLOGY 0610/12 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) May/June 2018 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2018 0610/12/M/J/18 

**1** Which organisms carry out respiration, growth, movement and excretion? 

 A all animals and all plants 

 B animals only 

 C arthropods and flowering plants only 

 D plants only 

**2** The diagram shows an animal whose scientific name is _Falco peregrinus_. 

 To which species does it belong? 

 A bird 

 B F. peregrinus 

 C Falco 

 D vertebrate 

**3** What kind of skin do amphibians have? 

 A dry without scales 

 B dry with scales 

 C moist without scales 

 D moist with scales 


© UCLES 2018 0610/12/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**4** The diagram shows a flowering plant. 

 Use the key to identify the plant. 

 flower has four petals 

 plant 

 leaves with jagged edges 

 leaves with smooth edges 

## A B 

 flower has five petals 

 leaves with jagged edges 

 leaves with smooth edges 

## C D 

**5** The diagram shows a plant cell. 

 In which labelled part of the cell is sugar made? 

 D cell wall 

## A 

 vacuole 

## B 

 chloroplast 

## C 

 nucleus 


© UCLES 2018 0610/12/M/J/18 

**6** Why do some root cells have root hairs? 

 A for the maintenance of the temperature of the cell sap 

 B to increase the surface area of the cells 

 C to increase the volume of the cell sap 

 D to provide a place for cell nuclei 

**7** The table shows the concentration of gases in a blood vessel and in an alveolus. 

 Which row shows the conditions that cause a gas produced in respiration to diffuse from the blood vessel into the alveolus? 

 gas produced concentration in the blood vessel 

 concentration in the alveolus 

 A carbon dioxide low high 

 B carbon dioxide high low 

 C oxygen low high 

 D oxygen high low 

**8** Which part of a plant root hair is partially permeable? 

 A the cell sap 

 B the cell surface membrane 

 C the cell vacuole 

 D the cell wall 

**9** The table shows the results of food tests carried out on a fruit. 

 test Benedict’s biuret ethanol iodine 

 result positive positive negative negative 

 What did the fruit contain? 

 A fat and reducing sugar 

 B fat and starch 

 C protein and reducing sugar 

 D protein and starch 


© UCLES 2018 0610/12/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**10** An experiment was carried out to investigate the effect of pH on enzyme action. The graph shows the results. 

 y-axis 

 x-axis 

 What are the labels for the x-axis and the y-axis? 

 x-axis y-axis 

 A pH rate of reaction 

 B pH time 

 C rate of reaction pH 

 D time pH 


© UCLES 2018 0610/12/M/J/18 

**11** An experiment is set up as shown. 

 test-tube X 

 small plant 

 gauze platform 

 green indicator 

 test-tube Y 

 The green indicator turns yellow when the concentration of carbon dioxide increases. The green indicator turns blue when the concentration of carbon dioxide decreases. 

 After several hours, the indicator in test-tube X turned blue. The indicator in test-tube Y remained green. 

 Which process caused the colour change? 

 A germination 

 B photosynthesis 

 C respiration 

 D transpiration 

**12** Why do plants need nitrate ions? 

 A for making amino acids 

 B for making fatty acids 

 C for making glucose 

 D for making starch 

**13** In which part of the alimentary canal do chemical digestion and mechanical digestion take place? 

 A colon 

 B duodenum 

 C mouth 

 D oesophagus 


© UCLES 2018 0610/12/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**14** The diagram shows part of the alimentary canal. 

 Where is most water absorbed? 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 

**15** A celery stalk was placed in a beaker which contained a red stain. After 24 hours, the red stain appeared at the top of the celery stalk. 

 Which structures stained red? 

 A cortex cells 

 B mesophyll cells 

 C phloem 

 D xylem 

**16** A student is investigating the effect of temperature on the rate of transpiration. 

 Which environmental conditions should be kept constant during this investigation? 

 humidity light intensity temperature wind speed 

 A     

 B     

 C     

 D     


© UCLES 2018 0610/12/M/J/18 

**17** The diagram shows the human heart. 

## R 

## P Q 

## S 

 In which order does blood pass through the chambers during a complete circuit of the body after it returns from the lungs? 

 A Q → R → S → P 

 B Q → R → P → S 

 C P → S → Q → R 

 D P → S → R → Q 

**18** The diagrams show some components of the blood of a mammal. 

 Which component causes the blood to start clotting? 

 A B C D 

**19** The body produces mucus as a defence against diseases. 

 What type of defence is stomach acid? 

 cells 

 chemical barrier 

 mechanical barrier 

 A    

 B    

 C    

 D    


© UCLES 2018 0610/12/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**20** A sample of expired air is collected in a gas jar. Another gas jar contains normal atmospheric air. 

 A lighted candle is placed inside each gas jar as shown. The time taken for each flame to go out is measured. As the candles burn they use up the oxygen available in the jar. 

 gas jar X gas jar Y 

 lid 

 air sample 

 candle 

 The table shows the results of this experiment. 

 gas jar 

 time for candle flame to go out / s 

## X 15 

## Y 9 

 What is an explanation of the difference between the results in jars X and Y? 

 A Jar X contains atmospheric air which has more carbon dioxide. 

 B Jar X contains expired air which has more carbon dioxide. 

 C Jar Y contains atmospheric air which has less oxygen. 

 D Jar Y contains expired air which has less oxygen. 

**21** Which row describes anaerobic respiration? 

 energy released 

 oxygen required 

 waste products 

 A a little no lactic acid 

 B a little yes carbon dioxide and water 

 C a lot no lactic acid 

 D a lot yes carbon dioxide and water 


© UCLES 2018 0610/12/M/J/18 

**22** The diagram shows the excretory system. 

## X 

 What is structure X? 

 A bladder 

 B kidney 

 C ureter 

 D urethra 

**23** The diagram shows structures in a reflex arc. 

 receptor 

 muscle 

## X 

 What is X? 

 A effector 

 B relay neurone 

 C sensory neurone 

 D synapse 


© UCLES 2018 0610/12/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**24** Which row describes the effect of the hormone adrenaline on breathing rate, pulse rate and pupil size? 

 breathing rate pulse rate pupil size 

 A decrease decrease larger 

 B decrease increase smaller 

 C increase decrease smaller 

 D increase increase larger 

**25** The diagram shows a seedling growing inside a dark box. 

 shoot 

 root 

 dark box 

 What type of responses affect the direction of growth of the root and the shoot in this experiment? 

 response by the root response by the shoot 

 A gravitropism gravitropism 

 B gravitropism phototropism 

 C phototropism gravitropism 

 D phototropism phototropism 

**26** What is the definition of a drug? 

 A any illegal substance taken into the body 

 B any substance taken into the body 

 C any substance taken into the body that modifies or affects chemical reactions in the body 

 D any substance taken into the body which is not a medicine 


© UCLES 2018 0610/12/M/J/18 

**27** The graph shows the number of alcohol-related deaths in men and women between the years 2001 and 2005 in one country. 

 400 

## 300 

## 200 

## 100 

## 0 

## 0–19 20–34 35–49 

 age group / years 

 number of alcoholrelated deaths 

## 50–64 65+ 

 key men 

 women 

 Which conclusion is supported by the data in the graph? 

 A All alcohol-related deaths increase with age. 

 B Men in the 35– 49 year old age group are most likely to die due to alcohol-related reasons. 

 C Men in the 65+ age group are least likely to die due to alcohol-related reasons. 

 D Women are more likely to die due to alcohol-related reasons than men. 

**28** The diagram shows a potato tuber that developed from the stem of a parent potato plant. Three shoots are starting to grow from the tuber. 

 shoot 

 tuber 

 How do the genotypes of the shoots compare with the genotypes of the tuber and of the parent? 

 genotype of tuber 

 genotype of parent 

 A is different to the shoots is different to the shoots 

 B is different to the shoots is identical to the shoots 

 C is identical to the shoots is different to the shoots 

 D is identical to the shoots is identical to the shoots 


© UCLES 2018 0610/12/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**29** The list shows various terms used in sexual reproduction in organisms. 

 1 male gamete 

 2 female gamete 

 3 ovule 

 4 ovary 

 5 filament 

 6 fertilisation 

 7 haploid 

 Which terms are only used in sexual reproduction in plants? 

 A 1 and 7 B 2 and 4 C 2 and 6 D 3 and 5 

**30** The diagram shows stages of a menstrual cycle. 

 During which stage does menstruation occur? 

 ovulation 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 


© UCLES 2018 0610/12/M/J/18 

**31** The diagram shows part of the female reproductive system with a birth control device in place. 

 uterus 

 Which birth control device is being used? 

 A chemical implant 

 B diaphragm 

 C femidom 

 D IUD 

**32** Which chromosomes can be found in a single sperm? 

 A X and X B X and Y C X or X D X or Y 

**33** Which term is used for an organism that has two different alleles of a particular gene? 

 A dominant 

 B heterozygous 

 C homozygous 

 D recessive 

**34** What is an adaptive feature of an organism? 

 A any feature that is changed by the environment 

 B any feature that helps an organism to survive and reproduce 

 C any feature that shows continuous variation 

 D any inherited feature than an organism has 

**35** What is required for natural selection to occur? 

 A genetic variation between individuals 

 B humans selecting desirable characteristics 

 C no competition between individuals or resources 

 D offspring produced by asexual reproduction 


© UCLES 2018 0610/12/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**36** What is the principal source of energy for most food chains? 

 A carbon dioxide gas 

 B glucose 

 C oxygen 

 D sunlight 

**37** The diagram shows part of the carbon cycle. 

 coal, oil and gas 

 gradual production of fossil fuels 

 carbon dioxide in atmosphere 

 Which process is missing from the diagram? 

 A combustion 

 B photosynthesis 

 C plant respiration 

 D decomposition 

**38** Genetic engineering has been used to produce human insulin. 

 Into which type of cell were the human genes for insulin inserted? 

 A animal 

 B bacterial 

 C fungal 

 D human 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2018 0610/12/M/J/18 

**39** What are reasons for using chemical fertilisers in food production? 

 increase pollution in rivers and lakes 

 increase crop yields 

 reduce competition between crops and weeds 

 A    

 B    

 C    

 D    

**40** As well as carbon dioxide, which other gas is mainly responsible for the enhanced greenhouse effect? 

 A methane 

 B oxygen 

 C ozone 

 D sulfur dioxide 


