 This document has 16 pages. Blank pages are indicated. 

IB20 06_0620_11/4RP© UCLES 2020 (^) **[Turn over** 

## *5245914244* 

# Cambridge IGCSE ™ 

### CHEMISTRY 0620/11 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) May/June 2020 45 minutes You must answer on the multiple choice answer sheet. You will need: Multiple choice answer sheetSoft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) INSTRUCTIONS 

- There are **forty** questions on this paper. Answer **all** questions. 

- For each question there are four possible answersand record your choice in soft pencil on the multiple choice answer sheet. **A** , **B** , **C** and **D**. Choose the **one** you consider correct 

- Follow the instructions on the multiple choice answer sheet. 

- Write in soft pencil. 

- Write your name, centre number and candidate number on the multiple choice answer sheet in thespaces provided unless this has been done for you. 

- Do **not** use correction fluid. 

- Do **not** write on any bar codes. 

- You may use a calculator. **INFORMATION** 

- The total mark for this paper is 40. 

- Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. 

- Any rough working should be done on this question paper. 

- The Periodic Table is printed in the question paper. 


© UCLES 2020 0620/11/M/J/20 

**1** Nitrogen is heated in a balloon, which expands slightly. Which statements about the molecules of nitrogen are correct? 1 They move further apart. 2 They move more quickly. 3 They remain the same distance apart. 4 Their speed remains unchanged. **A** 1 and 2 **B** 1 and 4 **C** 2 and 3 **D** 3 and 4 

**2** Which piece of apparatus should be used to measure exactly 21.4 cm^3 of water? **A** 25 cm^3 beaker **B** 25 cm^3 pipette **C** 50 cm^3 burette **D** 50 cm^3 measuring cylinder 

**3** Which method of separation is used to separate a soluble solid from its solution? **A** chromatography **B** condensation **C** crystallisation **D** filtration 

**4** The atomic number and nucleon number of a potassium atom are shown. 

 potassium atom atomic number 19 nucleon number 39 How many protons, neutrons and electrons are in a potassium ion, K +? protons neutrons electrons A 19 20 18 B 19 20 20 C 20 19 18 D 20 19 19 


© UCLES 2020 0620/11/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**5** Sodium is in Group I of the Periodic Table. Chlorine is in Group VII of the Periodic Table. Sodium and chlorine combine to form a compound. Which statement about the combination of sodium and chlorine atoms is correct? **A** Both sodium and chlorine lose electrons. **B** Both sodium and chlorine gain electrons. **C** Sodium loses electrons and chlorine gains electrons. **D** Sodium gains electrons and chlorine loses electrons. 

**6** The electronic structures of two atoms, P and Q, are shown. 

### P Q 

 P and Q combine together to form a compound. What is the type of bonding in the compound and what is the formula of the compound? type of bonding formula A ionic PQ 

**B** ionic PQ (^2) **C** covalent PQ 2 **D** covalent PQ 


© UCLES 2020 0620/11/M/J/20 

**7** The structures of diamond and graphite are shown. 

 Which statement about diamond and graphite is correct? A Diamond and graphite have low melting points. B Diamond and graphite have mobile electrons. C Diamond and graphite have layered structures. D Diamond and graphite contain strong covalent bonds between carbon atoms. 

**8** Aluminium oxide has the formula A _l_ (^) 2 O 3. Which statement about aluminium oxide is correct? **A** 2 g of aluminium atoms are combined with 3 g of oxygen atoms. **B** 2 g of aluminium atoms are combined with 3 g of oxygen molecules. **C** Aluminium oxide has a relative formula mass of 102. **D** Pure aluminium oxide contains a higher mass of oxygen than of aluminium. **9** Which products are formed when dilute sulfuric acid undergoes electrolysis? at the anode at the cathode **A** oxygen hydrogen **B** hydrogen oxygen **C** sulfur dioxide hydrogen **D** oxygen sulfur dioxide **10** Which element is **not** used as a fuel? **A** carbon **B** helium **C** hydrogen **D** uranium 


© UCLES 2020 0620/11/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**11** The energy level diagram shows the energy of the reactants and products in a chemical reaction. 

 reactants 

 progress of reaction 

 products 

 energy 

 Which row correctly describes the energy change and the type of reaction shown? 

 energy changedescription of type of reaction A energy is given out to the surroundings 

 endothermic B energy is given out to the surroundings 

 exothermic C energy is taken in from the surroundings 

 endothermic D energy is taken in from the surroundings 

 exothermic 

**12** Which diagram represents a chemical change? **A B** 

### C D 


© UCLES 2020 0620/11/M/J/20 

**13** The rate of reaction between magnesium and hydrochloric acid is investigated. The volume of hydrogen given off at different times is measured. The results are shown. 25 20 15 10 5 

(^00 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100) volume of hydrogen / cm 3 time / s Which conclusions are correct? 1 The rate is fastest between 0 and 20 seconds. 2 The maximum volume of hydrogen given off is 22 cm^3. 3 At 40 seconds, 20 cm^3 of hydrogen is given off. **A** 1 and 2 only **B** 1 and 3 only **C** 2 and 3 only **D** 1, 2 and 3 **14** Which reaction can be easily reversed? **A** dissolving zinc in hydrochloric acid **B** fermenting glucose with yeast 

## C heating hydrated cobalt(II) chloride 

 D the rusting of an iron nail 

**15** Carbon reacts with silver oxide to form carbon dioxide and silver. Which substance is reduced? **A** carbon **B** carbon dioxide **C** silver **D** silver oxide 


© UCLES 2020 0620/11/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**16** The graph shows how the pH of a solution changes as an acid is added to an alkali. acid + alkali → salt + water Which letter represents the area of the graph where both acid and salt are present? 

 pH 

**A** (^) **B C** 

### D 

### 14 

### 7 

(^0) volume of acid added **17** Phosphorus is an element in Group V of the Periodic Table. It burns in air to form an oxide, which dissolves in water to form a solution with a pH of 1. Which row describes this oxide of phosphorus? metal oxide non-metal oxide acidic oxide basic oxide **A**     **B**     **C**     **D**     


© UCLES 2020 0620/11/M/J/20 

## 18 The apparatus shown is used to prepare aqueous copper(II) sulfate. 

### Y 

 solid X 

 aqueous 

## copper(II) sulfate 

 excess of solid X 

 filter paper 

 heat 

 stirrer 

 What are X and Y? X Y 

## A copper aqueous iron(II) sulfate 

## B copper(II) chloride dilute sulfuric acid 

## C copper(II) oxide dilute sulfuric acid 

## D sulfur aqueous copper(II) chloride 

**19** Two tests are carried out on substance Z. test 1 A flame test produces a red flame. test 2 Z is dissolved in water and dilute nitric acid is added, followed by aqueous silver nitrate. A yellow precipitate is produced. What is substance Z? **A** lithium bromide **B** lithium iodide **C** sodium bromide **D** sodium iodide 


© UCLES 2020 0620/11/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**20** The elements in Period 3 of the Periodic Table are shown. 

 Na Mg A l Si P S C l Ar Which statements about the elements in Period 3 are correct? 1 Na, Mg and A l are metals. 2 S, C l and Ar are non-metals. 3 Si, P and S are metals. A 1 and 2 only B 1 and 3 only C 2 and 3 only D 1, 2 and 3 

**21** A Group I metal (lithium, sodium or potassium) is reacted with a Group VII element (chlorine, bromine or iodine). Which compound is formed when the Group I metal of highest density reacts with the Group VII element of lowest density? **A** lithium chloride **B** potassium chloride **C** potassium iodide **D** lithium iodide 

**22** The properties of the element titanium, Ti, can be predicted from its position in the Periodic Table. Which row identifies the properties of titanium? 

 as a catalystcan be used conducts electricitywhen solid has low density^ forms colouredcompounds A     B     C     D     


© UCLES 2020 0620/11/M/J/20 

**23** A balloon is filled with helium. Helium is a noble gas and makes the balloon rise up in the air. The density of air is 1.23 g / dm^3. Which gas is helium? density in g / dm^3 reaction with oxygen **A** 0.0899 burns rapidly **B** 0.179 does not react with oxygen **C** 1.78 does not react with oxygen **D** 3.75 does not react with oxygen 

**24** Which property is shown by **all** metals? **A** They are extracted from their ores by heating with carbon. **B** They conduct electricity. **C** They form acidic oxides. **D** They react with hydrochloric acid to form hydrogen. 

**25** The properties of four metals, W, X, Y and Z, are shown. W It does not react with cold water but reacts with steam. X It does not react with water or dilute acid but the oxide of X is reduced by carbon. Y The oxide of Y is not reduced by carbon but Y reacts vigorously with cold water. Z It does not react with water or steam but reacts with dilute acid. What is the order of reactivity of the elements starting with the most reactive? most reactive 

 least reactive A X W Z Y B X Z W Y C Y W Z X D Y Z W X 


© UCLES 2020 0620/11/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**26** Molten iron from the blast furnace contains impurities. The process of turning the impure iron into steel involves blowing oxygen into the molten iron and adding calcium oxide. What are the reasons for blowing in oxygen and adding calcium oxide? blowing in oxygen adding calcium oxide **A** carbon is removed by reacting with oxygen reacts with acidic impurities making slag **B** carbon is removed by reacting with oxygen reacts with slag and so removes it **C** iron reacts with the oxygen reacts with acidic impurities making slag **D** iron reacts with the oxygen reacts with slag and so removes it 

**27** Which row describes two uses of the named steel? 

 type of steel uses A mild steel cutlery and car bodies B mild steel car bodies and chemical plant C stainless steel cutlery and chemical plant D stainless steel car bodies and cutlery 

**28** Which statement shows that a liquid is pure water? **A** It boils at 100 °C. **B** It has a pH value of 7. 

## C It turns blue cobalt(II) chloride pink. 

## D It turns white copper(II) sulfate blue. 

**29** Some gases are present in clean air while other gases are only present in polluted air. Which row is correct? a gas presentin clean air a gasin polluted air **only** present **A** argon carbon dioxide **B** argon nitrogen dioxide **C** sulfur dioxide carbon dioxide **D** sulfur dioxide nitrogen dioxide 


© UCLES 2020 0620/11/M/J/20 

**30** The diagrams show experiments to investigate rusting of iron nails. 3 

 boiled water 

### 2 

 salt water 

### 1 

 tap water 

 layer of oil 

 In which test-tubes do the nails rust? A 1 only B 1 and 2 only C 1 and 3 only D 1, 2 and 3 

**31** Which mixture contains all of the elements in a typical fertiliser? **A** ammonium nitrate and calcium phosphate **B** ammonium phosphate and potassium chloride **C** potassium nitrate and ammonium chloride **D** potassium carbonate and ammonium nitrate 

**32** Which processes produce methane? 1 complete combustion of carbon-containing compounds 2 decomposition of vegetation 3 digestion in animals 4 respiration in animals **A** 1 and 4 **B** 1 and 3 **C** 2 and 3 **D** 2 and 4 


© UCLES 2020 0620/11/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**33** The list shows four methods that were suggested for the formation of carbon dioxide. 1 cracking methane using steam 2 action of heat on a carbonate 3 complete combustion of methane 4 reaction of a carbonate with oxygen Which methods would result in the production of carbon dioxide? **A** 1 and 2 **B** 1 and 4 **C** 2 and 3 **D** 3 and 4 

**34** A student suggests three uses of calcium carbonate (limestone). 1 manufacture of cement 2 manufacture of iron 3 treating alkaline soils Which suggestions are correct? **A** 1 and 2 only **B** 1 and 3 only **C** 2 and 3 only **D** 1, 2 and 3 

**35** Which list shows the fractions obtained from distilling petroleum, in order of increasing boiling point? **A** bitumen → diesel oil → fuel oil → lubricating oil **B** diesel oil → gasoline → naphtha → kerosene **C** gasoline → naphtha → kerosene → diesel oil **D** kerosene → lubricating oil → naphtha → refinery gas 

**36** Which statement about members of a homologous series is correct? **A** They are elements with the same chemical properties. **B** They are compounds with the same functional group. **C** They are atoms with the same number of outer electrons. **D** They are molecules with the same boiling point. 


© UCLES 2020 0620/11/M/J/20 

**37** Increasing the number of atoms in one molecule of a hydrocarbon increases the amount ofenergy released when it burns. 

 What is the correct order? less energyreleased more energyreleased A ethene ethane methane B ethene methane ethane C methane ethane ethene D methane ethene ethane 

**38** Which statements about ethanol are correct? 1 Ethanol is made by reacting steam with ethene at 300 °C. 2 Ethanol is made by fermentation at 55 °C. 3 Ethanol burns to produce carbon dioxide and water. 4 Ethanol contains a carbon-carbon double bond. **A** 1 and 2 **B** 1 and 3 **C** 2 and 3 **D** 3 and 4 

**39** Some properties of an organic compound J are listed. ● It is a liquid at room temperature. ● It is soluble in water. ● A solution of J reacts with calcium carbonate to form carbon dioxide. ● A solution of J has a pH of 3. In which homologous series does J belong? **A** alkane **B** alkene **C** alcohol **D** carboxylic acid 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeAssessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University ofCambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2020 0620/11/M/J/20 

**40** Which polymers or types of polymer are synthetic? 1 carbohydrates 2 nylon 3 proteins 4 _Terylene_ **A** 1 and 3 **B** 1 and 4 **C** 2 and 3 **D** 2 and 4 


© UCLES 2020 0620/11/M/J/20 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements^1 Hhydrogen^1 

(^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Beberyllium 9 **Key** atomic numberatomic symbol name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mgmagnesium 24 19 Kpotassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Srstrontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Gegermanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 (^22) Tititanium (^4840) Zrzirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rfrutherfordium– 23 Vvanadium (^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Crchromium (^5242) Momolybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sgseaborgium– (^25) Mnmanganese (^5543) Tctechnetium– (^75) Rerhenium (^186107) Bhbohrium– (^26) Feiron (^5644) Ruruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Iriridium (^192109) Mtmeitnerium– (^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pdpalladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Dsdarmstadtium– (^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rgroentgenium– (^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cdcadmium (^11280) Hgmercury (^201112) Cncopernicium– 114 F _l_ flerovium– (^116) Lvlivermorium– (^7) Nnitrogen 1415 Pphosphorus (^3133) Asarsenic (^7551) Sbantimony 12283 Bibismuth 209 (^8) Ooxygen 1616 Ssulfur (^3234) Seselenium (^7952) Tetellurium (^12884) Popolonium– (^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Brbromine 8053 I iodine 12785 Atastatine– (^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Scscandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) Lalanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). actinium– (^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium^141 (^91) Paprotactinium 231 (^60) Ndneodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pmpromethium– (^93) Npneptunium– (^62) Smsamarium (^15094) Puplutonium– (^63) Eueuropium (^15295) Amamericium– (^64) Gdgadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bkberkelium– (^66) Dydysprosium 16398 Cfcalifornium– (^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Eseinsteinium– (^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Mdmendelevium– (^70) Ybytterbium (^173102) Nonobelium– (^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lrlawrencium– 


