® IGCSE is a registered trademark. 

 This syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 11 printed pages. 

© UCLES 2017 **[Turn over** 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

**PHYSICS 0625/32** 

Paper 3 Core Theory **March 2017** 

MARK SCHEME 

Maximum Mark: 80 

 Published 

This mark scheme is published as an aid to teachers and candidates, to indicate the requirements of the examination. It shows the basis on which Examiners were instructed to award marks. It does not indicate the details of the discussions that took place at an Examiners’ meeting before marking began, which would have considered the acceptability of alternative answers. 

Mark schemes should be read in conjunction with the question paper and the Principal Examiner Report for Teachers. 

Cambridge will not enter into discussions about these mark schemes. 

Cambridge is publishing the mark schemes for the March 2017 series for most Cambridge IGCSE®^ , Cambridge International A and AS Level components and some Cambridge O Level components. 


0625 / 32 Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme **PUBLISHED** 

 March 2017 

© UCLES 2017 Page 2 of 11 

## NOTES ABOUT MARK SCHEME SYMBOLS AND OTHER MATTERS 

M marks are method marks upon which further marks depend. For an M mark to be scored, the point to which it refers **must** be seen in a candidate’s answer. If a candidate fails to score a particular M mark, then none of the dependent marks can be scored. 

B marks are independent marks, which do not depend on other marks. For a B mark to be scored, the point to which it refers must be seen specifically in the candidate’s answers. 

A marks In general, A marks are awarded for final answers to numerical questions. If a final numerical answer, eligible for A marks, is correct, with the correct unit and an acceptable number of significant figures, all the marks for that question are normally awarded. It is very occasionally possible to arrive at a correct answer by an entirely wrong approach. In these rare circumstances, do not award the A marks, but award C marks on their merits. However, correct numerical answers with no working shown gain all the marks available. 

C marks are compensatory marks in general applicable to numerical questions. These can be scored even if the point to which they refer are not written down by the candidate, **provided subsequent working gives evidence that they must have known it.** For example, if an equation carries a C mark and the candidate does not write down the actual equation but does correct substitution or working which shows that they knew the equation, then the C mark is scored. A C mark is not awarded if a candidate makes two points which contradict each other. Points which are wrong but irrelevant are ignored. 

Brackets ( ) around words or units in the mark scheme are intended to indicate wording used to clarify the mark scheme, but the marks do not depend on seeing the words or units in brackets e.g. 10 (J) means that the mark is scored for 10, regardless of the unit given. 

Underlining indicates that this must be seen in the answer offered, or something very similar. 

OR / or indicates alternative answers, any one of which is satisfactory for scoring the marks. 

e.e.o.o. means “each error or omission”. 

o.w.t.t.e. means “or words to that effect”. 

Ignore indicates that something which is not correct or irrelevant is to be disregarded and does not cause a right plus wrong penalty. 

Spelling Be generous about spelling and use of English. If an answer can be understood to mean what we want, give credit. However, beware of and do not allow ambiguities: e.g. spelling which suggests confusion between reflection / refraction / diffraction or thermistor / transistor / transformer. 

Not/NOT indicates that an incorrect answer is not to be disregarded, but cancels another otherwise correct alternative offered by the candidate i.e. right plus wrong penalty applies. 


0625 / 32 Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme **PUBLISHED** 

 March 2017 

© UCLES 2017 Page 3 of 11 

e.c.f. means “error carried forward”. This is mainly applicable to numerical questions, but may occasionally be applied in non-numerical questions if specified in the mark scheme. This indicates that if a candidate has made an earlier mistake and has carried an incorrect value forward to subsequent stages of working, marks indicated by e.c.f. may be awarded, provided the subsequent working is correct. 

Significant Answers are normally acceptable to any number of significant figures ⩾ 2. Any Figures exceptions to this general rule will be specified in the mark scheme. 

Units Deduct one mark for each incorrect or missing unit from **an answer that would otherwise gain all the marks available for that answer: maximum 1 per question.** No deduction is incurred if the unit is missing from the final answer but is shown correctly in the working. Condone wrong use of upper and lower case symbols, e.g. pA for Pa. **Use the annotation Xp to signify where a unit penalty has been applied.** 

Arithmetic errors Deduct only one mark if the **only** error in arriving at a final answer is clearly an arithmetic one. Regard a power-of-ten error as an arithmetic one. 

Transcription Deduct only one mark if the only error in arriving at a final answer is because errors given or previously calculated data has clearly been misread but used correctly. 

Fractions Only accept these where specified in the mark scheme. 

Crossed out work Work which has been crossed out **and not replaced but can easily be read** , should be marked as if it had not been crossed out. 


## /^32 

Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

March 2017 

 Page 4 of 11 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 1(a)(i) 

## A 

## OR 

 E stated 

## B1 

 1(a)(ii) 

## C 

## B1 

 1(a)(iii) 

 area under graph 

## C1 

## 0.5 

## ⋅ 

## 16 

## ⋅ 

## 8 

## C1 

## 64 

 (m) 

## A1 

 1(b) 

 single straight line from origin drawn 

## B1 

 diagonal line finishing at 10 

 m 

 /^ s in 20 

 s 

## B1 

 1(c) 

 Steeper (gradient) owtte 

## B1 

 Total: 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 2(a)(i) 

## N, L 

## B1 

 2(a)(ii) 

## M, K 

## B1 

 2(b) 

 D = M ÷ V in any recognised form 

## C1 

## 2.6 

## A1 

 g^ 

 /^ cm 

 3 

## B1 

 Total: 


## /^32 

Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

March 2017 

 Page 5 of 11 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 3(a) 

 point where all the weight seems to act owtte 

## B1 

 3(b)(i) 

 moments clockwise = moments anticlockwise 

## C1 

 2.5 X 18 = 1.5 x? 

## OR 

## 45 ÷ 1.5 

## C1 

 30 (cm) 

## A1 

 3(b)(ii) 

 w = m 

## ⋅ 

 g in any recognised form 

## C1 

## 2.5 ÷ 10 

## C1 

## 0.25 

 (kg) 

## A1 

 Total: 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 4(a) 

 fission 

## B1 

 4(b) 

 plutonium 

## OR 

 uranium 

## B1 

 4(c) 

 L in first box 

## B1 

 K and M in second and third boxes respectively 

## B1 

 J in fourth box 

## B1 

 4(d) 

 dangerous to humans 

 /^ ionising radiation 

## B1 

 (concrete) prevents leaks 

 /^ absorbs radioactivity 

## B1 


## /^32 

Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

March 2017 

 Page 6 of 11 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 4(e) 

 no polluting gases 

 /^ saves fossil fuels 

 /^ does not need wind to operate owtte 

## B1 

 waste products difficult to deal with 

## /^ 

 last long time 

## B1 

 4(f) 

 wind 

## OR 

 wave 

 /^ tidal 

## OR 

 solar 

## OR 

 wood 

## OR 

 biofuel 

## OR 

## HEP 

## OR 

 geothermal 

## OR 

 hydroelectric 

## B1 

 Total: 

## 10 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 5(a) 

 P = F ÷ A in any recognised form 

## C1 

## 6500 ÷ 100 

## C1 

## 65 

## (N 

 /^ cm 

## 2 ) 

## A1 

 5(b) 

 smaller area (at point) 

## B1 

 greater pressure 

## B1 

 Total: 


## /^32 

Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

March 2017 

 Page 7 of 11 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 6(a) 

 evaporation 

 /^ boiling 

 solidification 

 /^ freezing 

 melting 

## B3 

 6(b) 

 faster movement 

 /^ gain 

 kinetic energy 

## B1 

 larger separation of molecules owtte 

## B1 

 6(c) 

 all boxes ticked 

## B1 

 6(d) 

 bimetal strips 

## B1 

 train rails buckling 

## B1 

 Total: 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 7(a) 

 energy 

## B1 

 frequency 

## B1 

 amplitude 

## B1 

 wavelength 

## B1 

 7(b) 

 (transverse) vibrations perpendicular to travel/energy transfer 

## B1 

 Total: 


## /^32 

Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

March 2017 

 Page 8 of 11 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 8(a) 

 indication of speeds 

 /^ velocity 

## B1 

 light quickest 

## B1 

 8(b)(i) 

 echo 

 /^ reflection (of sound) 

## B1 

 from cliff 

## B1 

 8(b)(ii) 

 speed = distance ÷ time in any recognised form 

## C1 

## 1000 ÷ 330 

## C1 

## 3.03 

 (s) 

## A1 

 5–7 seconds 

## B1 

 Total: 


## /^32 

Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

March 2017 

 Page 9 of 11 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

## 9 

 Any five, in any order, from water heats up 

## B1 

 molecules gain kinetic energy 

 /^ move faster 

 /^ move further apart 

## B1 

 water expands 

## OR 

 water volume increases 

## B1 

 density (of water) decreases 

## B1 

 warm water rises 

## OR 

 cool water falls 

## B1 

 convection (current) 

## B1 

 Total: 


## /^32 

Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

March 2017 

 Page 10 of 11 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 10(a) 

## 70 ( 

 o ) 

## B1 

 10(b)(i) 

 normal correctly positioned on B 

## B1 

 reflected ray drawn correctly 

## B1 

 10(b)(ii) 

 r^ 

 labelled correctly 

## B1 

 10(c) 

 i = r 

 /^ angle of incidence = angle of reflection 

## B1 

 Total: 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 11(a) 

 metal 

## B1 

 11(b)(i) 

 volt 

## OR 

## V 

## OR 

 mV 

## B1 

 11(b)(ii) 

## 1 

 Nothing owtte 

## B1 

## 2 

 pointer deflects 

 /^ moves 

## B1 

 backwards 

 and 

 forwards owtte 

## B1 

 11(c) 

## 1 

 strength of magnet 

## B1 

## 2 

 rate of (relative) movement 

## B1 

 Total: 


## /^32 

Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

March 2017 

 Page 11 of 11 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 12(a) 

 neutron 

## B1 

 proton 

## B1 

 electron 

## B1 

 12(b) 

 nucleus labelled 

## B1 

 P + N in central position 

## B1 

 3 protons and 4 neutrons clearly shown 

## B1 

 3 electrons in outer shell(s) 

## B1 

 Total: 


