 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 17 printed pages and 3 blank pages. 

 IB15 11_0620_11/5RP © UCLES 2015 [Turn over 

# *0290816641* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/11 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice October/November 2015 

 45 Minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A, B, C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 20. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2015 0620/11/O/N/15 

1 Diagrams X, Y and Z represent the three states of matter. 

## X Y Z 

 Which change occurs during boiling? 

 A X to Y B Y to Z C Z to X D Z to Y 

2 P, Q, R and S are pieces of apparatus. 

## P Q R S 

 50 cm^3 50 cm^3 

 25 cm^3 100 cm^3 

 Which row describes the correct apparatus for the measurement made? 

 apparatus measurement made 

 A P the volume of acid added to alkali in a titration 

 B Q 1 cm^3 of acid to add to calcium carbonate in a rate-determining experiment 

 C R 75 cm^3 of a gas given off in a rate-determining experiment 

 D S 20 cm^3 of alkali for use in a titration 

3 Which statement about atoms is correct? 

 A Atoms contain protons and electrons in the nucleus. 

 B Neutrons are negatively charged. 

 C Protons are positively charged. 

 D The nucleon number is the number of neutrons. 


© UCLES 2015 0620/11/O/N/15 [Turn over 

4 Which diagram correctly shows the ions present in the compound potassium fluoride? 

 e 

 e 

 e 

 e e e e 

 e e e 

 e e 

 e e 

 e e 

 e e 

 e 

 e 

 e 

 e e 

 e 

 e e 

 e e 

 e 

 e 

 e 

 e e e e 

 e e e 

 e e 

 e e 

 e e 

 e e 

 e 

 e 

 e 

 e e 

 e 

 e e 

 e e 

 e 

## A K+ 

## B K– 

## C K+ 

## D K– 

## F– 

## F+ 

 key 

 = nucleus 

 = electron 

 e 

 e 

 e e e e 

 e e e 

 e e 

 e e 

 e e 

 e e 

 e 

## F– 

 e 

 e 

 e e 

 e 

 e e 

 e e 

 e 

## + 

## – 

 e 

 e 

 e e e e 

 e e e 

 e e 

 e e 

 e e 

 e e 

 e 

## F+ 

 e 

 e 

 e e 

 e 

 e e 

 e e 

 e 

## – 

## + 

+ (^) – 

## + 

## – 


© UCLES 2015 0620/11/O/N/15 

5 What do the nuclei of (^11) Hhydrogen atoms contain? A electrons and neutrons B electrons and protons C neutrons only D protons only 6 The electronic structures of atoms X and Y are shown. 

## X Y 

 X and Y form a covalent compound. 

 What is its formula? 

 A XY 5 B XY 3 C XY D X 3 Y 

7 Two atoms of magnesium, Mg, react with one molecule of oxygen, O 2. 

 What is the formula of the product? 

 A MgO B MgO 2 C Mg 2 O D Mg 2 O 2 

8 Which row describes the electrolysis of molten potassium bromide? 

 product at anode product at cathode 

 A bromine hydrogen 

 B bromine potassium 

 C hydrogen bromine 

 D potassium bromine 


© UCLES 2015 0620/11/O/N/15 [Turn over 

9 The diagram shows a section of an overhead power cable. 

 aluminium 

 steel ceramic 

 Which statement explains why a particular substance is used? 

 A Aluminium has a low density and is a good conductor of electricity. 

 B Ceramic is a good conductor of electricity. 

 C Steel can rust in damp air. 

 D Steel is more dense than aluminium. 

10 Which reaction is endothermic? 

 A acid neutralising alkali causing a temperature increase 

 B adding magnesium to hydrochloric acid 

 C calcium carbonate decomposing when heated 

 D combustion of fossil fuels 


© UCLES 2015 0620/11/O/N/15 

11 Solid hydrated sodium carbonate was added to solid citric acid. 

 The mixture was stirred and the temperature recorded every 10 seconds. 

 The results are shown on the graph: 

## 25 

## 20 

## 15 

## 10 

## 5 

## 0 

 temperature / °C 

## 0 20 40 60 

 time / s 

## 80 100 

 Which row describes the reaction? 

 reaction type energy change 

 A neutralisation endothermic 

 B neutralisation exothermic 

 C thermal decomposition endothermic 

 D thermal decomposition exothermic 

12 The effect of temperature on the rate of the reaction between marble chips and hydrochloric acid can be investigated by measuring the production of carbon dioxide. 

 Which item of equipment is not required for the investigation? 

 A condenser 

 B gas syringe 

 C stopclock 

 D thermometer 


© UCLES 2015 0620/11/O/N/15 [Turn over 

13 The element vanadium, V, forms several oxides. 

 In which change is oxidation taking place? 

 A VO 2 → V 2 O 3 

 B V 2 O 5 → VO 2 

 C V 2 O 3 → VO 

 D V 2 O 3 → V 2 O 5 

# 14 Some crystals of hydrated cobalt(II) chloride are heated in a test-tube until no further change is 

 observed. 

 The test-tube is allowed to cool and a few drops of water are then added to the contents. 

 Which colours are observed? 

 before heating 

 after heating 

 after adding water 

 A blue pink blue 

 B blue white blue 

 C pink blue pink 

 D white blue white 

15 The diagram shows a simplified form of the Periodic Table: 

## W X 

## Y 

## Z 

 Which elements will form an acidic oxide? 

 A W and Z B W only C X and Y only D Y only 


© UCLES 2015 0620/11/O/N/15 

16 A white solid is insoluble in water. 

 When it is added to hydrochloric acid, bubbles of gas are formed. 

 Adding aqueous ammonia to the solution formed gives a white precipitate. Adding excess aqueous ammonia causes the precipitate to re-dissolve. 

 What is the white solid? 

 A aluminium nitrate 

 B ammonium nitrate 

 C calcium carbonate 

 D zinc carbonate 

17 Which property is not characteristic of a base? 

 A It reacts with a carbonate to form carbon dioxide. 

 B It reacts with an acid to form a salt. 

 C It reacts with an ammonium salt to form ammonia. 

 D It turns universal indicator paper blue. 

18 Four stages in the preparation of a salt from an acid and a solid metal oxide are listed. 

 1 Add excess solid. 

 2 Evaporate half the solution and leave to cool. 

 3 Filter to remove unwanted solid. 

 4 Heat the acid. 

 In which order should the stages be carried out? 

 A 1 → 3 → 4 → 2 

 B 2 → 1 → 3 → 4 

 C 4 → 1 → 3 → 2 

 D 4 → 2 → 1 → 3 


© UCLES 2015 0620/11/O/N/15 [Turn over 

19 Which statements about Group I and Group VII elements are correct? 

 1 In Group I, lithium is more reactive than potassium. 

 2 In Group VII, chlorine is more reactive than fluorine. 

 statement 1 statement 2 

 A   

 B   

 C   

 D   

20 The Periodic Table lists all the known elements. 

 Elements are arranged in order of ....... 1 ....... number. 

 The melting points of Group I elements ....... 2 ....... down the group. 

 The melting points of Group VII elements ....... 3 ....... down the group. 

 Which words correctly complete the gaps 1, 2 and 3? 

## 1 2 3 

 A nucleon decrease increase 

 B nucleon increase decrease 

 C proton decrease increase 

 D proton increase decrease 

21 The table gives information about four elements. 

 Which element is a transition metal? 

 electrical conductivity 

 density in g / cm^3 

 melting point in °C 

 A good 0.97 98 

 B good 7.86 1535 

 C poor 2.33 1410 

 D poor 3.12 –7 


© UCLES 2015 0620/11/O/N/15 

22 The Group 0 elements are unreactive. 

 The gas used to fill balloons is ....... X........ 

 This gas is unreactive because it has ....... Y....... electrons in its outermost shell. 

 Which words correctly complete gaps X and Y? 

## X Y 

 A argon eight 

 B argon two 

 C helium eight 

 D helium two 

23 Which diagram shows the structure of an alloy? 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

 + + 

 + 

 + 

 + 

 + + 

 + 

 + + 

 + + 

 + 

## A 

## C 

## B 

## D 


© UCLES 2015 0620/11/O/N/15 [Turn over 

24 The diagrams show what happens when three different metals are added to water. 

## X Y Z 

 bubbles of gas 

 flame 

 What are X, Y and Z? 

## X Y Z 

 A calcium copper potassium 

 B copper calcium potassium 

 C potassium calcium copper 

 D potassium copper calcium 

25 Which metal would be suitable for all of the following uses? 

- making aircraft bodies 

- making food containers 

- making overhead power cables 

 A aluminium 

 B brass 

 C mild steel 

 D pure iron 

26 Iron is extracted from its ore (hematite) in the blast furnace. 

 Which gas is produced as a waste product? 

 A carbon dioxide 

 B hydrogen 

 C nitrogen 

 D oxygen 


 © UCLES 2015 0620/11/O/N/15 

 27 Which statements about water are correct? 

 1 Household water may contain salts in solution. 

 2 Water for household use is filtered to remove soluble impurities. 

 3 Water is treated with chlorine to kill bacteria. 

 4 Water is used in industry for cooling. 

 A 1, 2, 3 and 4 

 B 1, 2 and 3 only 

 C 1, 3 and 4 only 

 D 2, 3 and 4 only 

28 Which is a use of oxygen? 

 A as the gas in a lamp 

 B to react with ethene to form ethanol 

 C to react with methane in a Bunsen burner 

 D to react with hematite to form iron 

 29 Carbon monoxide is an air pollutant produced when petrol is burned in a car engine. 

 Why is carbon monoxide considered to be an air pollutant? 

 A It causes climate change. 

 B It causes the corrosion of buildings. 

 C It is a significant greenhouse gas. 

 D It is poisonous. 

 30 Fertilisers are mixtures of different compounds used to increase the growth of crops. 

 Which pair of substances contains the three essential elements for plant growth? 

 A ammonium nitrate and calcium phosphate 

 B ammonium nitrate and potassium chloride 

 C ammonium phosphate and potassium chloride 

 D potassium nitrate and calcium carbonate 


© UCLES 2015 0620/11/O/N/15 [Turn over 

31 Which process does not produce carbon dioxide? 

 A complete combustion of a fossil fuel 

 B fermentation 

 C reaction of an alkali with a carbonate 

 D respiration 

32 The apparatus shown is set up and left for a week. 

 damp iron wool 

 air 

 water 

 Which diagram shows the level of the water at the end of the week? 

## A B C D 

33 Carbon dioxide and methane both contribute to climate change. 

 Which process produces both gases? 

 A complete combustion of natural gas 

 B farming cattle 

 C heating calcium carbonate 

 D respiration 


© UCLES 2015 0620/11/O/N/15 

34 A student is asked to draw a diagram showing the uses of limestone. 

 limestone 

 making cement 

 making lime 

 added, with hematite, to a blast furnace 

## 1 2 

## 3 

 Which numbered lines show a correct use of limestone? 

 A 1, 2 and 3 

 B 1 and 2 only 

 C 1 and 3 only 

 D 2 and 3 only 

35 The diagram shows the structure of a simple hydrocarbon and the products of two of its reactions. 

 Br C Br 

## H 

## H 

## C C C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

 dibromoethane ethane ethanol 

## 1 2 3 

## H C 

## H 

## H 

## C O 

## H 

## H 

## H 

 bromine steam 

 Which structures are named correctly? 

 structure 

 1 2 3 

 A    

 B    

 C    

 D    


© UCLES 2015 0620/11/O/N/15 [Turn over 

36 Which row describes the formation of a polymer? 

 monomer polymer 

 A ethane poly(ethane) 

 B ethane poly(ethene) 

 C ethene poly(ethane) 

 D ethene poly(ethene) 

37 What is not the correct use for the fraction named? 

 name of fraction use 

 A fuel oil making waxes 

 B gas oil diesel engines 

 C kerosene jet fuel 

 D naphtha fraction making chemicals 

38 Ethanol can be formed by 

 1 fermentation 

 2 reaction between steam and ethene 

 Which of these processes uses a catalyst? 

## 1 2 

## A   

## B   

## C   

## D   


© UCLES 2015 0620/11/O/N/15 

39 Which homologous series is not represented in the compounds shown below? 

## H C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## C C H 

## H C 

## H 

## H H 

## H 

## O 

## C C O H 

## H C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## O 

## H 

## H H 

## C C H 

## H C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## H H H 

## C C H 

 A alcohols 

 B alkanes 

 C alkenes 

 D carboxylic acids 

40 Alkenes are manufactured by cracking hydrocarbons obtained from petroleum. 

 hydrocarbon P obtained from petroleum hydrocarbon Q 

 cracking 

 Which row describes the size of the molecules in hydrocarbons P and Q and the effect of Q on aqueous bromine? 

 size of P molecules 

 size of Q molecules 

 effect of Q on aqueous bromine 

 A large small decolourises 

 B large small no effect 

 C small large decolourises 

 D small large no effect 


© UCLES 2015 0620/11/O/N/15 

## BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2015 0620/11/O/N/15 

## BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2015 0620/11/O/N/15 

## BLANK PAGE 


To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

© UCLES 2015 0620/11/O/N/15 

 Group 

(^140) **Ce** Cerium 58 141 **Pr** Praseodymium 59 (^144) **Nd** Neodymium 60 **Pm** Promethium 61 (^150) **Sm** Samarium 62 (^152) **Eu** Europium 63 (^157) **Gd** Gadolinium 64 (^159) **Tb** Terbium 65 (^162) **Dy** Dysprosium 66 (^165) **Ho** Holmium 67 167 **Er** Erbium 68 (^169) **Tm** Thulium 69 (^173) **Yb** Ytterbium 70 (^175) **Lu** Lutetium 71 (^232) **Th** Thorium 90 **Pa** Protactinium 91 238^ **U** Uranium 92 **Np** Neptunium 93 **Pu** Plutonium 94 **Am** Americium 95 **Cm** Curium 96 **Bk** Berkelium 97 **Cf** Californium 98 **Es** Einsteinium 99 **Fm** Fermium 100 **Md** Mendelevium 101 **No** Nobelium 102 **Lr** Lawrencium 103 (^1) **H** Hydrogen 1 (^7) **Li** Lithium 3 (^23) **Na** Sodium 11 (^24) **Mg** Magnesium 12 (^40) **Ca** Calcium 20 (^45) **Sc** Scandium 21 (^48) **Ti** Titanium 22 51 **V** Vanadium 23 (^52) **Cr** Chromium 24 (^55) **Mn** Manganese 25 (^56) **Fe** Iron 26 (^59) **Co** Cobalt 27 (^59) **Ni** Nickel 28 (^64) **Cu** Copper 29 (^65) **Zn** Zinc 30 (^70) **Ga** Gallium 31 (^27) **A** **_l_** Aluminium 13 11 **B** Boron 5 (^12) **C** Carbon 6 14 **N** Nitrogen 7 (^16) **O** Oxygen 8 19 **F** Fluorine 9 (^28) **Si** Silicon 14 31 **P** Phosphorus 15 32 **S** Sulfur 16 35.5 **C** **_l_** Chlorine 17 (^40) **Ar** Argon 18 (^20) **Ne** Neon 10 (^4) **He** Helium 2 (^73) **Ge** Germanium 32 (^75) **As** Arsenic 33 (^79) **Se** Selenium 34 (^80) **Br** Bromine 35 (^84) **Kr** Krypton 36 39 **K** Potassium 19 (^88) **Sr** Strontium 38 89 **Y** Yttrium 39 (^91) **Zr** Zirconium 40 (^93) **Nb** Niobium 41 (^96) **Mo** Molybdenum 42 **Tc** Technetium 43 (^101) **Ru** Ruthenium 44 (^103) **Rh** Rhodium 45 (^106) **Pd** Palladium 46 (^108) **Ag** Silver 47 (^112) **Cd** Cadmium 48 (^115) **In** Indium 49 (^119) **Sn**^ Tin 50 (^122) **Sb** Antimony 51 (^128) **Te** Tellurium 52 127^ **I** Iodine 53 (^131) **Xe** Xenon 54 (^137) **Ba** Barium 56 (^139) **La** Lanthanum 57 * 178 **Hf** Hafnium 72 (^181) **Ta** Tantalum 73 184 **W** Tungsten 74 (^186) **Re** Rhenium 75 (^190) **Os** Osmium 76 (^192) **Ir** Iridium 77 195 **Pt** Platinum 78 (^197) **Au** Gold 79 (^201) **Hg** Mercury 80 204 **T** **_l_** Thallium 81 (^207) **Pb** Lead 82 209 **Bi** Bismuth 83 **Po** Polonium 84 **At** Astatine 85 **Rn** Radon 86 **Fr** Francium 87 (^227) **Ac** Actinium 89 (^9) **Be** Beryllium 4 I^ II^ III IV V VI VII 0 (^85) **Rb** Rubidium 37 (^133) **Cs** Caesium 55 (^226) **Ra** Radium 88 The volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). a **X** b a = relative atomic mass **X**^ = atomic symbol b = proton (atomic) number *58-71 Lanthanoid series90-103 Actinoid seriesKey **DATA SHEET The Periodic Table of the Elements** 


