 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all questions. Electronic calculators may be used. You may lose marks if you do not show your working or if you do not use appropriate units. Practical notes are provided on page 8. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. 

 CHEMISTRY 0620/52 Paper 5 Practical Test October/November 2015 1 hour 15 minutes Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: As listed in the Confidential Instructions 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

 This document consists of 7 printed pages and 1 blank page. 

 [Turn over 

 IB15 11_0620_52/FP © UCLES 2015 

# *6783073891* 

 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 For Examiner’s Use 

 Total 


© UCLES 2015 0620/52/O/N/15 

**1** You are going to investigate the rate of reaction when magnesium ribbon reacts with four solutions of dilute sulfuric acid, of different concentrations, labelled solutions **A** , **B** , **C** and **D**. The sulfuric acid is in excess in all experiments. 

 Read all the instructions below carefully before starting the experiments. 

 Instructions You are going to carry out five experiments. 

 (a) Experiment 1 

 Using a measuring cylinder, pour 30 cm 3 of dilute sulfuric acid^ A^ into the beaker. Start the timer and add the 4 cm length of magnesium to the sulfuric acid in the beaker. Stir the mixture constantly. Measure the time taken for all of the magnesium to react and disappear. Record the time in the table below. Rinse out the beaker with distilled water. 

 (b) Experiment 2 

 Repeat Experiment 1, using the solution B of sulfuric acid. Record the time in the table. 

 (c) Experiment 3 

 Repeat Experiment 1, using the solution C of sulfuric acid. Record the time in the table. 

 (d) Experiment 4 

 Repeat Experiment 1, using the solution D of sulfuric acid. Record the time in the table. 

 Experiment number 

 solution of sulfuric acid 

 concentration of sulfuric acid in mol / dm 3 

 time for magnesium to completely disappear in seconds 

 1 A 1.0 

## 2 B 0.8 

## 3 C 0.6 

## 4 D 0.5 

## [4] 

 (e) Experiment 5 

 Pour about 3 cm^3 of the solution C of sulfuric acid into a test-tube and record its temperature. Add a 4 cm length of magnesium. Record all of your observations and test the gas given off with a splint. 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [2] 


© UCLES 2015 0620/52/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

 (f) Plot the results for Experiments 1, 2, 3 and 4 on the grid and draw a smooth line graph. 

## 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 

 concentration of sulfuric acid in mol / dm 3 

 time in seconds 

## 0.8 1.0 1.2 

## 180 

## 160 

## 140 

## 120 

## 100 

## 80 

## 60 

## 40 

## 20 

## 0 

## [3] 

 (g) (i) From your graph , deduce the concentration of the sulfuric acid if the time for the reaction was 80 s. Show clearly on the graph how you worked out your answer. 

 .................................... mol / dm 3 [2] 


© UCLES 2015 0620/52/O/N/15 

 (ii) From your graph , deduce how long the reaction would take if a solution of sulfuric acid of concentration 1.2 mol / dm 3 was used. Show clearly on the graph how you worked out your answer. 

 .................................... s [2] 

 (h) Why was the same amount of magnesium used in Experiments 1, 2, 3 and 4? 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

 (i) Use your observations in Experiment 5 to answer these questions. 

 (i) What type of chemical reaction occurs when magnesium reacts with sulfuric acid? 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [1] 

 (ii) Identify the gas given off. 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [1] 

 (iii) Suggest the effect on the temperature change if this experiment was repeated using 2 cm of magnesium ribbon. 

 ............................................................................................................................................. 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [1] 

 (j) Suggest a different method which could be used to investigate the rate of the reaction between magnesium and sulfuric acid. State the difference in the apparatus used and measurements to be taken. 

 apparatus ................................................................................................................................... 

 measurements ........................................................................................................................... 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [3] 

 [Total: 20] 


© UCLES 2015 0620/52/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

**2** You are provided with two metal salt solutions, **X** and **Y**. Carry out the following tests on **X** and **Y** , recording all of your observations in the tables. Conclusions must **not** be written in the tables. 

 tests observations 

 tests on solution X 

 (a) Describe the appearance of solution X. ................................................................ [1] 

 Divide the solution into four equal portions in separate test-tubes. 

 (b) To the first portion of solution add about 1 cm^3 of dilute nitric acid followed by 

aqueous silver nitrate. (^) ................................................................ [2] **(c)** To the second portion of solution add about 1 cm^3 of aqueous sodium hydroxide and shake the mixture and leave to stand. Note how the mixture changes after five minutes. 

## ................................................................ [1] 

## ................................................................ [1] 

 (d) To the third portion of solution add excess 

aqueous ammonia. (^) ................................................................ [1] **(e)** To the fourth portion of solution add a few drops of dilute sulfuric acid followed by about 1 cm^3 of aqueous potassium 

# manganate(VII). 

 Now add aqueous sodium hydroxide to the mixture. 

## ................................................................ [1] 

## ................................................................ [2] 


© UCLES 2015 0620/52/O/N/15 

 tests observations 

 tests on solution Y 

 Divide the solution into three equal portions in separate test-tubes. 

 (f) To the first portion of the solution add about 1 cm^3 of dilute hydrochloric acid. ................................................................ [1] 

 (g) Tip the second portion of the solution into a boiling tube. Add about 1 cm 3 of aqueous sodium hydroxide and shake the mixture. Add one small piece of aluminium foil to the mixture and warm gently. Test the gas given off with red litmus paper. 

## ...................................................................... 

## ................................................................ [3] 

 (h) To the third portion of the solution add aqueous potassium iodide. ................................................................ [2] 

 (i) What conclusions can you draw about solution X? 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [3] 

 (j) What conclusions can you draw about solution Y? 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [2] 

 [Total: 20] 


© UCLES 2015 0620/52/O/N/15 

## BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2015 0620/52/O/N/15 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

## NOTES FOR USE IN QUALITATIVE ANALYSIS 

**Test for anions** 

 anion test test result carbonate (CO 3 2–^ ) add dilute acid effervescence, carbon dioxide produced chloride (C l –^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify with dilute nitric acid, then add aqueous silver nitrate 

 white ppt. 

 iodide (I–^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify with dilute nitric acid, then add aqueous silver nitrate 

 yellow ppt. 

 nitrate (NO 3 –^ ) [in solution] 

 add aqueous sodium hydroxide then aluminium foil; warm carefully 

 ammonia produced 

 sulfate (SO 4 2–^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify with dilute nitric acid, then aqueous barium nitrate 

 white ppt. 

**Test for aqueous cations** 

 cation effect of aqueous sodium hydroxide effect of aqueous ammonia 

 aluminium (A l 3+^ ) 

 white ppt., soluble in excess giving a colourless solution 

 white ppt., insoluble in excess 

 ammonium (NH 4 +^ ) ammonia produced on warming – 

 calcium (Ca 2+^ ) white ppt., insoluble in excess no ppt., or very slight white ppt. 

 copper (Cu 2+^ ) light blue ppt., insoluble in excess light blue ppt., soluble in excess giving a dark blue solution 

# iron(II) (Fe2+^ ) green ppt., insoluble in excess green ppt., insoluble in excess 

# iron(III) (Fe3+^ ) red-brown ppt., insoluble in excess red-brown ppt., insoluble in excess 

 zinc (Zn 2+^ ) white ppt., soluble in excess giving a colourless solution 

 white ppt., soluble in excess giving a colourless solution 

**Test for gases** 

 gas test and test results 

 ammonia (NH 3 ) turns damp red litmus paper blue 

 carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) turns limewater milky 

chlorine (C _l_ (^) 2 ) bleaches damp litmus paper hydrogen (H 2 ) ‘pops’ with a lighted splint oxygen (O 2 ) relights a glowing splint 


