 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. 

 IB15 11_0620_12/3RP © UCLES 2015 [Turn over 

# *1006769290* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/12 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice October/November 2015 

 45 Minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A, B, C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2015 0620/12/O/N/15 

1 Which change of state takes place during evaporation? 

 A gas to liquid 

 B liquid to gas 

 C liquid to solid 

 D solid to gas 

2 The diagram shows apparatus being used to demonstrate how the rate of a chemical reaction changes with temperature. 

 reaction mixture 

 measuring cylinder 

 tank 

 Which statement must be correct? 

 A The reaction is endothermic. 

 B The reaction is exothermic. 

 C The reaction produces a gas. 

 D The reaction produces an acid. 


© UCLES 2015 0620/12/O/N/15 [Turn over 

3 The table shows the nucleon number and the number of neutrons in one atom of isotopes W, X, Y and Z. 

 isotope nucleonnumber number ofneutrons 

## W 35 18 

## X 37 20 

## Y 39 20 

## Z 40 22 

 Which statement about W, X, Y and Z is correct? 

 A W and X are isotopes of the same element. 

 B X and Y are isotopes of elements in the same group of the Periodic Table. 

 C Y and Z are isotopes of elements in the same period of the Periodic Table. 

 D Z has a higher proton number than Y. 

4 Compound X melts at 801 °C and is a good electrical conductor when dissolved in water. 

 Compound Y boils at 77 °C, is insoluble in water and is a non-conductor of electricity. 

 Which type of bonding is present in X and in Y? 

## X Y 

 A covalent covalent 

 B covalent ionic 

 C ionic covalent 

 D ionic ionic 

5 What do the nuclei of 11 Hhydrogen atoms contain? 

 A electrons and neutrons 

 B electrons and protons 

 C neutrons only 

 D protons only 


© UCLES 2015 0620/12/O/N/15 

6 The electronic structures of atoms X and Y are shown. 

## X Y 

 X and Y form a covalent compound. 

 What is its formula? 

 A XY 5 B XY 3 C XY D X 3 Y 

7 The relative atomic mass of chlorine is 35.5. 

 When calculating relative atomic mass, which particle is the mass of a chlorine atom compared to? 

 A a neutron 

 B a proton 

 C an atom of carbon-12 

 D an atom of hydrogen-1 

8 The diagram shows the electrolysis of concentrated hydrochloric acid and concentrated aqueous sodium chloride using carbon electrodes. 

## + – + – 

 electrode 1 electrode 2 

 concentrated hydrochloric acid 

 electrode 3 electrode 4 

 concentrated aqueous sodium chloride 

 At which electrode(s) is hydrogen produced? 

 A electrode 1 only 

 B electrodes 1 and 3 

 C electrode 2 only 

 D electrodes 2 and 4 


© UCLES 2015 0620/12/O/N/15 [Turn over 

9 The diagram shows a section of an overhead power cable. 

 aluminium 

 steel ceramic 

 Which statement explains why a particular substance is used? 

 A Aluminium has a low density and is a good conductor of electricity. 

 B Ceramic is a good conductor of electricity. 

 C Steel can rust in damp air. 

 D Steel is more dense than aluminium. 

10 Hydrogen can be used as a fuel. 

 Which properties of hydrogen would be advantages and which would be disadvantages? 

 1 Hydrogen is expensive to produce. 

 2 Hydrogen reacts exothermically with oxygen. 

 3 When hydrogen burns, a greenhouse gas is not formed. 

 advantages disadvantages 

 A 1 2 and 3 

 B 1 and 2 3 

 C 1 and 3 2 

 D 2 and 3 1 

11 Which row correctly describes whether the reaction is exothermic or endothermic? 

 reaction exothermic endothermic 

 A calcium carbonate → calcium oxide + carbon dioxide   

 B carbon + oxygen → carbon dioxide   

 C methane + oxygen → carbon dioxide + water   

 D sodium + water → sodium hydroxide + hydrogen   


© UCLES 2015 0620/12/O/N/15 

12 The diagram shows four experiments in which equal volumes of aqueous acid (all in an excess) are added to equal masses of metal. Both acids have the same concentration. 

 In which experiment has the metal completely reacted in the shortest time? 

 HC l 

 copper granules 

## A 

HNO (^3) copper powder 

## B 

 HC l 

 zinc granules 

## C 

HNO (^3) zinc powder 

## D 

13 The element vanadium, V, forms several oxides. 

 In which change is oxidation taking place? 

 A VO 2 → V 2 O 3 

 B V 2 O 5 → VO 2 

 C V 2 O 3 → VO 

 D V 2 O 3 → V 2 O 5 

14 Which reaction is not a reversible reaction? 

 A combustion of alkanes 

# B hydration of anhydrous copper(II) sulfate 

# C melting lead(II) bromide 

# D thermal decomposition of hydrated cobalt(II) chloride 

15 The reaction between magnesium and carbon dioxide is represented by the following equation. 

 2Mg + CO 2 →^ 2MgO + C 

 Which statement describes what happens in this reaction? 

 A Carbon is oxidised. 

 B Magnesium is reduced. 

 C Neither oxidation nor reduction happens. 

 D The carbon in carbon dioxide is reduced. 


© UCLES 2015 0620/12/O/N/15 [Turn over 

16 Which element forms an acidic oxide? 

## A 

## B C D 

17 Which property is not characteristic of a base? 

 A It reacts with a carbonate to form carbon dioxide. 

 B It reacts with an acid to form a salt. 

 C It reacts with an ammonium salt to form ammonia. 

 D It turns universal indicator paper blue. 

18 A sting from insect X has a pH of 6 and a sting from insect Y has a pH of 8. 

 The table shows the pH of four substances. 

 substance pH 

 hydrochloric acid 1 

 sodium hydrogen carbonate 8 

 sodium hydroxide 14 

 vinegar 5 

 Which substances are used to treat the two stings? 

## X Y 

 A hydrochloric acid sodium hydroxide 

 B sodium hydrogen carbonate vinegar 

 C sodium hydroxide hydrochloric acid 

 D vinegar sodium hydrogen carbonate 


© UCLES 2015 0620/12/O/N/15 

19 A salt is produced in each of the following reactions. 

 P magnesium + dilute hydrochloric acid 

 Q zinc oxide + dilute sulfuric acid 

 R sodium hydroxide + dilute hydrochloric acid 

 S copper carbonate + dilute sulfuric acid 

 Which statements about the products of the reactions are correct? 

 1 A flammable gas is produced in reaction P. 

 2 Water is formed in all reactions. 

 3 All the salts formed are soluble in water. 

 A 1, 2 and 3 B 1 and 2 only C 1 and 3 only D 2 and 3 only 

20 The table shows the symbols of three metals with names that begin with the letter C. 

 Which row correctly shows the melting point of the metals? 

 Co Cr Cs 

 A high high high 

 B high high low 

 C low low high 

 D low low low 

21 The table gives information about four elements. 

 Which element is a transition metal? 

 electrical conductivity 

 density in g / cm^3 

 melting point in °C 

 A good 0.97 98 

 B good 7.86 1535 

 C poor 2.33 1410 

 D poor 3.12 –7 


© UCLES 2015 0620/12/O/N/15 [Turn over 

22 The diagram shows elements W, X, Y and Z in a section of the Periodic Table. 

## X 

## Y 

## Z 

## W 

 Which statement about the reactivity of the elements is correct? 

 A X is more reactive than Y, and W is more reactive than Z. 

 B X is more reactive than Y, and Z is more reactive than W. 

 C Y is more reactive than X, and W is more reactive than Z. 

 D Y is more reactive than X, and Z is more reactive than W. 

23 Which two elements make up mild steel? 

 A aluminium and magnesium 

 B copper and zinc 

 C iron and carbon 

 D tin and lead 

24 The diagrams show what happens when three different metals are added to water. 

## X Y Z 

 bubbles of gas 

 flame 

 What are X, Y and Z? 

## X Y Z 

 A calcium copper potassium 

 B copper calcium potassium 

 C potassium calcium copper 

 D potassium copper calcium 


© UCLES 2015 0620/12/O/N/15 

25 Which substances do not react together? 

 A calcium + water 

 B copper + dilute hydrochloric acid 

 C sodium + water 

 D zinc + dilute hydrochloric acid 

26 Iron is extracted from hematite in a blast furnace. 

 Which reaction increases the temperature in the blast furnace to over 1500 °C? 

 A calcium carbonate → calcium oxide + carbon dioxide 

 B calcium oxide + silicon dioxide → calcium silicate 

 C carbon + oxygen → carbon dioxide 

 D carbon dioxide + carbon → carbon monoxide 

27 Which statements about water are correct? 

 1 Household water may contain salts in solution. 

 2 Water for household use is filtered to remove soluble impurities. 

 3 Water is treated with chlorine to kill bacteria. 

 4 Water is used in industry for cooling. 

 A 1, 2, 3 and 4 

 B 1, 2 and 3 only 

 C 1, 3 and 4 only 

 D 2, 3 and 4 only 

28 Which gas is a pollutant of the air? 

 A argon 

 B carbon dioxide 

 C nitrogen 

 D sulfur dioxide 


© UCLES 2015 0620/12/O/N/15 [Turn over 

29 Carbon monoxide is an air pollutant produced when petrol is burned in a car engine. 

 Why is carbon monoxide considered to be an air pollutant? 

 A It causes climate change. 

 B It causes the corrosion of buildings. 

 C It is a significant greenhouse gas. 

 D It is poisonous. 

30 Metals are welded by using the heat produced by burning a gas in oxygen. 

 Which gas could not be used for this purpose? 

 A ethene 

 B hydrogen 

 C helium 

 D methane 

31 Which elements are present in NPK fertilisers? 

 A nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium 

 B nitrogen, potassium, calcium 

 C sodium, phosphorus, potassium 

 D sodium, potassium, calcium 


© UCLES 2015 0620/12/O/N/15 

32 The apparatus shown is set up and left for a week. 

 damp iron wool 

 air 

 water 

 Which diagram shows the level of the water at the end of the week? 

 A B C D 

33 A farmer moves his cows into a concrete shelter for protection. 

 There is little access for fresh air once the door is closed. 

 Which gases would increase in amount in the shelter? 

 A carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide 

 B carbon dioxide and methane 

 C carbon monoxide and oxygen 

 D methane and oxygen 


© UCLES 2015 0620/12/O/N/15 [Turn over 

34 A student is asked to draw a diagram showing the uses of limestone. 

 limestone 

 making cement 

 making lime 

 added, with hematite, to a blast furnace 

## 1 2 

## 3 

 Which numbered lines show a correct use of limestone? 

 A 1, 2 and 3 

 B 1 and 2 only 

 C 1 and 3 only 

 D 2 and 3 only 

35 Which formula is that of an alkene? 

 A C 2 H 6 B C 3 H 6 C C 3 H 8 D C 4 H 10 

36 Which row describes the formation of a polymer? 

 monomer polymer 

 A ethane poly(ethane) 

 B ethane poly(ethene) 

 C ethene poly(ethane) 

 D ethene poly(ethene) 

37 Hydrocarbons obtained by fractional distillation of petroleum can be cracked to make useful products. 

 Which substance could not be obtained by cracking propane, Mr 44? 

 A C 2 H 4 B C 3 H 6 C C 4 H 8 D H 2 


© UCLES 2015 0620/12/O/N/15 

38 Ethanol can be formed by 

 1 fermentation 

 2 reaction between steam and ethene 

 Which of these processes uses a catalyst? 

## 1 2 

## A   

## B   

## C   

## D   

39 The flow chart shows the preparation of ethanol and some important chemistry of ethanol. 

 substance X ethanol carbon dioxide + substance Z 

 fermentation process Y 

 What are X, Y and Z? 

## X Y Z 

 A ethane combustion yeast 

 B glucose combustion steam 

 C water polymerisation water 

 D yeast fermentation glucose 

40 What are the properties of a dilute solution of ethanoic acid? 

 smell appearance 

 A odourless colourless 

 B odourless red 

 C pungent smell colourless 

 D pungent smell red 


© UCLES 2015 0620/12/O/N/15 

## BLANK PAGE 


To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

© UCLES 2015 0620/12/O/N/15 

 Group 

(^140) **Ce** Cerium 58 141 **Pr** Praseodymium 59 (^144) **Nd** Neodymium 60 **Pm** Promethium 61 (^150) **Sm** Samarium 62 (^152) **Eu** Europium 63 (^157) **Gd** Gadolinium 64 (^159) **Tb** Terbium 65 (^162) **Dy** Dysprosium 66 (^165) **Ho** Holmium 67 167 **Er** Erbium 68 (^169) **Tm** Thulium 69 (^173) **Yb** Ytterbium 70 (^175) **Lu** Lutetium 71 (^232) **Th** Thorium 90 **Pa** Protactinium 91 238^ **U** Uranium 92 **Np** Neptunium 93 **Pu** Plutonium 94 **Am** Americium 95 **Cm** Curium 96 **Bk** Berkelium 97 **Cf** Californium 98 **Es** Einsteinium 99 **Fm** Fermium 100 **Md** Mendelevium 101 **No** Nobelium 102 **Lr** Lawrencium 103 (^1) **H** Hydrogen 1 (^7) **Li** Lithium 3 (^23) **Na** Sodium 11 (^24) **Mg** Magnesium 12 (^40) **Ca** Calcium 20 (^45) **Sc** Scandium 21 (^48) **Ti** Titanium 22 51 **V** Vanadium 23 (^52) **Cr** Chromium 24 (^55) **Mn** Manganese 25 (^56) **Fe** Iron 26 (^59) **Co** Cobalt 27 (^59) **Ni** Nickel 28 (^64) **Cu** Copper 29 (^65) **Zn** Zinc 30 (^70) **Ga** Gallium 31 (^27) **A** **_l_** Aluminium 13 11 **B** Boron 5 (^12) **C** Carbon 6 14 **N** Nitrogen 7 (^16) **O** Oxygen 8 19 **F** Fluorine 9 (^28) **Si** Silicon 14 31 **P** Phosphorus 15 32 **S** Sulfur 16 35.5 **C** **_l_** Chlorine 17 (^40) **Ar** Argon 18 (^20) **Ne** Neon 10 (^4) **He** Helium 2 (^73) **Ge** Germanium 32 (^75) **As** Arsenic 33 (^79) **Se** Selenium 34 (^80) **Br** Bromine 35 (^84) **Kr** Krypton 36 39 **K** Potassium 19 (^88) **Sr** Strontium 38 89 **Y** Yttrium 39 (^91) **Zr** Zirconium 40 (^93) **Nb** Niobium 41 (^96) **Mo** Molybdenum 42 **Tc** Technetium 43 (^101) **Ru** Ruthenium 44 (^103) **Rh** Rhodium 45 (^106) **Pd** Palladium 46 (^108) **Ag** Silver 47 (^112) **Cd** Cadmium 48 (^115) **In** Indium 49 (^119) **Sn**^ Tin 50 (^122) **Sb** Antimony 51 (^128) **Te** Tellurium 52 127^ **I** Iodine 53 (^131) **Xe** Xenon 54 (^137) **Ba** Barium 56 (^139) **La** Lanthanum 57 * 178 **Hf** Hafnium 72 (^181) **Ta** Tantalum 73 184 **W** Tungsten 74 (^186) **Re** Rhenium 75 (^190) **Os** Osmium 76 (^192) **Ir** Iridium 77 195 **Pt** Platinum 78 (^197) **Au** Gold 79 (^201) **Hg** Mercury 80 204 **T** **_l_** Thallium 81 (^207) **Pb** Lead 82 209 **Bi** Bismuth 83 **Po** Polonium 84 **At** Astatine 85 **Rn** Radon 86 **Fr** Francium 87 (^227) **Ac** Actinium 89 (^9) **Be** Beryllium 4 I^ II^ III IV V^ VI VII 0 (^85) **Rb** Rubidium 37 (^133) **Cs** Caesium 55 (^226) **Ra** Radium 88 The volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). a **X** b a = relative atomic mass= atomic symbol **X**^ b = proton (atomic) number *58-71 Lanthanoid series90-103 Actinoid seriesKey **DATA SHEET The Periodic Table of the Elements** 


