 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all questions. Electronic calculators may be used. You may lose marks if you do not show your working or if you do not use appropriate units. Practical notes are provided on page 8. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. 

 CHEMISTRY 0620/53 Paper 5 Practical Test October/November 2015 1 hour 15 minutes Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: As listed in the Confidential Instructions 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certifi cate of Secondary Education 

 This document consists of 6 printed pages and 2 blank pages. 

 [Turn over 

 IB15 11_0620_53/2RP © UCLES 2015 

# *3872978216* 

 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 For Examiner’s Use 

 Total 


© UCLES 2015 0620/53/O/N/15 

# 1 You are going to investigate the reaction between an acidic solution of iron(II) sulfate, solution L , 

# and two different solutions of aqueous potassium manganate(VII), solutions M and N. 

 Read all the instructions below carefully before starting the experiments. 

 Instructions You are going to carry out two experiments. 

 (a) Experiment 1 

# Fill the burette with the solution M of potassium manganate(VII) to the 0.0 cm^3 mark. Using a 

 measuring cylinder pour 25 cm 3 of solution L into the conical flask. 

 Add 1 cm 3 of the solution M to the flask, with swirling. Continue to add solution M to the flask until the mixture just turns permanently pink. Record the burette readings in the table and complete the table. Pour away the contents of the conical fl ask and rinse the fl ask with distilled water. 

 fi nal burette reading / cm 3 

 initial burette reading / cm 3 

 difference / cm^3 [3] 

 (b) Experiment 2 

 Empty the burette and rinse thoroughly with distilled water. Add a small volume of the 

# solution N of aqueous potassium manganate(VII) to the burette and swirl. Discard this solution. 

# Now fi ll the burette with the solution N of potassium manganate(VII) to the 0.0 cm^3 mark. 

 Repeat Experiment 1 using solution N instead of solution M. Record the burette readings in the table and complete the table. 

 fi nal burette reading / cm 3 

 initial burette reading / cm 3 

 difference / cm^3 [3] 

 (c) Why is the burette washed with 

 (i) distilled water, 

 ............................................................................................................................................. 

 (ii) solution N , before starting Experiment 2? 

 ............................................................................................................................................. [2] 


© UCLES 2015 0620/53/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

 (d) (i) What colour change was observed in the flask during the addition of potassium 

# manganate(VII) solution to solution L in both experiments? 

 from ......................................................... to ............................................................... [1] 

 (ii) Explain why an indicator is not needed. 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [1] 

# (e) (i) In which experiment was the greatest volume of potassium manganate(VII) solution 

 used? 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [1] 

# (ii) Compare the volumes of potassium manganate(VII) solution used in Experiments 1 and 2. 

## ....................................................................................................................................... [1] 

 (iii) Suggest an explanation for the difference in volumes. 

 ............................................................................................................................................. 

 ............................................................................................................................................. 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [2] 

 (f) If Experiment 2 was repeated using 12.5 cm 3 of solution L , what volume of potassium 

# manganate(VII) solution would be used? Explain your answer. 

## .................................................................................................................................................... 

## .................................................................................................................................................... 

## .............................................................................................................................................. [2] 

 (g) Give one advantage and one disadvantage of using a measuring cylinder for solution L. 

 advantage .................................................................................................................................. 

 disadvantage ............................................................................................................................. [2] 

 [Total: 18] 


© UCLES 2015 0620/53/O/N/15 

**2** You are provided with two solids, **P** and **Q**. Carry out the following tests on the solids, recording all of your observations in the tables. Conclusions must **not** be written in the tables. 

 tests observations 

 tests on solid P 

 (a) Describe the appearance of solid P. ...................................................................... 

 (b) Use a spatula to place a little of solid P in to a dry test-tube. Heat the solid gently. 

## ...................................................................... 

## ................................................................ [2] 

 Add about 10 cm 3 of distilled water to the rest of solid P and shake to dissolve. Divide the solution into four equal portions in test-tubes. Carry out the following tests. 

 (c) Test the pH of the first portion of the solution. ................................................................ [1] 

 (d) Use a thermometer to measure the temperature of the second portion of solution P and record the temperature. Now add a spatula measure of sodium hydrogen carbonate to the solution and stir with the thermometer. Measure and record the temperature of the mixture after one minute. 

 initial temperature = ................................... °C 

 final temperature = .................................... °C 

 other observations = ...................................... 

 ...................................................................... 

## ................................................................ [3] 

 (e) Pour the third portion of the solution into a boiling tube. Add a spatula measure 

# of copper(II) oxide. Heat the mixture to 

 boiling. Leave the mixture to stand for one minute. 

## ...................................................................... 

## ................................................................ [1] 

 (f) To the fourth portion of the solution add a small measure of magnesium powder. Shake the mixture and test the gas evolved. 

## ...................................................................... 

## ................................................................ [3] 


© UCLES 2015 0620/53/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

 tests observations 

 tests on solid Q 

 (g) Describe the appearance of solid Q. ................................................................ [1] 

 (h) Add about 5 cm 3 of distilled water into a test-tube. Measure and record the initial temperature of the water. 

 Now add all of solid Q to the water and stir with the thermometer. Measure and record the temperature of the mixture after one minute. 

 Describe the mixture. 

 initial temperature = ................................... °C 

 final temperature = .................................... °C 

 ...................................................................... 

 ................................................................ [3] 

 Decant the solution and divide into two equal portions in test-tubes. 

 (i) To the first portion of the solution add an equal volume of aqueous sodium hydroxide. ................................................................ [2] 

 (j) To the second portion of the solution add drops of aqueous ammonia with shaking. 

 Now add excess aqueous ammonia. 

## ...................................................................... 

## ...................................................................... 

## ................................................................ [3] 

 (k) What conclusions can you draw about solid P? 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [2] 

 (l) What conclusion can you draw about solid Q? 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

 [Total: 22] 


© UCLES 2015 0620/53/O/N/15 

## BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2015 0620/53/O/N/15 

## BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2015 0620/53/O/N/15 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

## NOTES FOR USE IN QUALITATIVE ANALYSIS 

**Test for anions** 

 anion test test result carbonate (CO 3 2–^ ) add dilute acid effervescence, carbon dioxide produced chloride (C l –^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify with dilute nitric acid, then add aqueous silver nitrate 

 white ppt. 

 iodide (I–^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify with dilute nitric acid, then add aqueous silver nitrate 

 yellow ppt. 

 nitrate (NO 3 –^ ) [in solution] 

 add aqueous sodium hydroxide then aluminium foil; warm carefully 

 ammonia produced 

 sulfate (SO 4 2–^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify with dilute nitric acid, then aqueous barium nitrate 

 white ppt. 

**Test for aqueous cations** 

 cation effect of aqueous sodium hydroxide effect of aqueous ammonia 

 aluminium (A l 3+^ ) 

 white ppt., soluble in excess giving a colourless solution 

 white ppt., insoluble in excess 

 ammonium (NH 4 +) ammonia produced on warming – 

 calcium (Ca 2+^ ) white ppt., insoluble in excess no ppt., or very slight white ppt. 

 copper (Cu 2+^ ) light blue ppt., insoluble in excess light blue ppt., soluble in excess giving a dark blue solution 

# iron(II) (Fe2+^ ) green ppt., insoluble in excess green ppt., insoluble in excess 

# iron(III) (Fe3+^ ) red-brown ppt., insoluble in excess red-brown ppt., insoluble in excess 

 zinc (Zn 2+^ ) white ppt., soluble in excess giving a colourless solution 

 white ppt., soluble in excess giving a colourless solution 

**Test for gases** 

 gas test and test results 

 ammonia (NH 3 ) turns damp red litmus paper blue 

 carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) turns limewater milky 

chlorine (C _l_ (^) 2 ) bleaches damp litmus paper hydrogen (H 2 ) ‘pops’ with a lighted splint oxygen (O 2 ) relights a glowing splint 


