 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 16 printed pages. IB18 11_0620_22/4RP© UCLES 2018 [Turn over 

# *9042823184* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/22 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) October/November 2018 Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet^ 45 minutes Soft clean eraserSoft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil.Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unlessthis has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

There areanswers **A** (^) , **forty B** , **C** questions on this paper. Answerand **D**. **all** questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the **one** you consider correct and record your choice in **soft pencil** on the separate Answer Sheet. **Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully.** Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer.Any rough working should be done in this booklet. A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16.Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2018 0620/22/O/N/18 

**1** Oxygen and fluorine are gaseous elements next to each other in the Periodic Table. Under the same conditions of temperature and pressure, oxygen diffuses ......1...... than fluorine because its ......2...... is less than that of fluorine. Which words correctly complete gaps 1 and 2? 1 2 **A** faster molecular mass **B** faster reactivity **C** slower molecular mass **D** slower reactivity 

**2** The diagrams show four pieces of laboratory equipment. balance pipette stop-clock thermometer 

 Which equipment is essential to find out if dissolving a salt in water is an exothermic process? balance pipette stop-clock thermometer A     B     C     D     

**3** How many neutrons are present in the atom 4521 X? 

 A 21 B 24 C 45 D 66 


© UCLES 2018 0620/22/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**4** Two naturally occurring isotopes of oxygen are 16 O and 17 O. Which statement is correct? **A** Both isotopes react with iron to form rust. **B** Neither isotope reacts with iron to form rust. **C** Only 16 O reacts with iron to form rust. **D** Only 17 O reacts with iron to form rust. 

**5** How many electrons are used to form covalent bonds in a molecule of methanol, CH 3 OH? **A** 5 **B** 6 **C** 8 **D** 10 

**6** Potassium bromide and methanol are both compounds. Their melting points are different. Which row is correct? 

 higher melting pointsubstance with the reason why the melting points are different A methanol the attractive forces between oppositely charged ions is greater than the attractive forces between molecules 

**B** methanol (^) than the attractive forces between oppositely charged ionsthe attractive forces between molecules is greater **C** potassium bromide the attractive forces between oppositely charged ions is greater than the attractive forces between molecules **D** potassium bromide (^) than the attractive forces between oppositely charged ionsthe attractive forces between molecules is greater **7** Which gas sample contains the smallest number of molecules? **A** 4 g of helium **B** 16 g of oxygen **C** 28 g of carbon monoxide **D** 28 g of nitrogen 


© UCLES 2018 0620/22/O/N/18 

**8** The equation for the reaction between calcium carbonate and dilute nitric acid is shown. CaCO 3 (s) + 2HNO 3 (aq) → Ca(NO 3 ) 2 (aq) + CO 2 (g) + H 2 O(l) 25 g of calcium carbonate is reacted with an excess of dilute nitric acid. Which mass of calcium nitrate and which volume of carbon dioxide is produced at room temperature and pressure? mass of calcium nitrate / g 

 volume of carbon dioxide / dm^3 A 29 6 B 29 12 C 41 6 D 41 12 

**9** The formulae of some ions are shown. 

 positive ion negative ion Ti 4+^ PO 4 3– A l 3+^ SO 4 2– Mg 2+^ NO 3 – K+^ C l – Which formula is not correct? 

**A** A _l_ (^) 3 (SO 4 ) 2 **B** K 3 PO 4 **C** Mg(NO 3 ) 2 **D** TiC _l_ (^) 4 


© UCLES 2018 0620/22/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

# 10 Concentrated aqueous copper(II) chloride is electrolysed using copper electrodes as shown. 

 copper electrodes^ +^ – 

# aqueous copper(II) chloride 

 power supply 

 What happens to the mass of each electrode during this process? positive electrode negative electrode A decreases decreases B decreases increases C increases decreases D increases increases 


© UCLES 2018 0620/22/O/N/18 

# 11 The diagram shows a circuit used to electrolyse aqueous copper(II) sulfate. 

## + – 

## 2 

## 1 

## 3 4 

 copper electrodes 

 aqueous 

# copper(II) sulfate 

 power supply + – 

 Which arrows indicate the movement of the copper ions in the electrolyte and of the electrons inthe external circuit? 

 copper ions electrons A 1 3 B 1 4 C 2 3 D 2 4 

**12** Hydrogen peroxide, H–O–O–H, decomposes to form water and oxygen. 2H 2 O 2 (g) → 2H 2 O(g) + O 2 (g) The bond energies are shown in the table. The reaction is exothermic. bond bond energyin kJ / mol O–H +460 O–O +150 O=O +496 What is the energy change for the reaction? **A** –346 kJ / mol **B** –196 kJ / mol **C** +196 kJ / mol **D** +346 kJ / mol 


© UCLES 2018 0620/22/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**13** The equation for the formation of ammonia is shown. N 2 + 3H 2 → 2NH 3 The energy level diagram for the reaction is shown. 

 energy 

 progress of reaction 

 energy change 

## N 2 + 3H 2 

2NH (^3) total energy released = –342 kJ / mol activation energy = +250 kJ / mol What is the energy change for the reaction? **A** –592 kJ / mol **B** –92 kJ / mol **C** +92 kJ / mol **D** +592 kJ / mol **14** The rate of reaction between magnesium ribbon and 2 mol / dm^3 hydrochloric acid at 25 °C to produce hydrogen gas is measured. In another experiment, either the concentration of the hydrochloric acid or the temperature is changed. All other conditions are kept the same. Which conditions increase the rate of reaction? **A** 1 mol / dm^3 hydrochloric acid at 25 °C **B** 2 mol / dm^3 hydrochloric acid at 10 °C **C** 2 mol / dm^3 hydrochloric acid at 20 °C **D** 3 mol / dm^3 hydrochloric acid at 25 °C 


© UCLES 2018 0620/22/O/N/18 

**15** Methanol is prepared by the reversible reaction shown. CO(g) + 2H 2 (g) CH 3 OH(g) The forward reaction is exothermic. Which conditions produce the highest equilibrium yield of methanol? temperature pressure **A** high high **B** high low **C** low high **D** low low 

# 16 The thermite reaction can be used to produce iron from iron(III) oxide. 

 The equation for the reaction is shown. 

2A _l_ + Fe 2 O 3 → 2Fe + A _l_ (^) 2 O 3 Which statements about this reaction are correct? 1 Aluminium is the oxidising agent. 2 Aluminium is less reactive than iron. 3 Electrons are transferred from aluminium to iron. 

# 4 The iron in the iron(III) oxide is reduced. 

 A 1 and 3 B 1 and 4 C 2 and 3 D 3 and 4 

**17** In which row are the oxides correctly identified? 

 acidic basic A magnesium oxide, calcium oxide sulfur dioxide, carbon dioxide B magnesium oxide, sulfur dioxide carbon dioxide, calcium oxide C sulfur dioxide, carbon dioxide calcium oxide, magnesium oxide D sulfur dioxide, magnesium oxide calcium oxide, carbon dioxide 


© UCLES 2018 0620/22/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**18** When dilute sulfuric acid is added to solid X, a colourless solution is formed and a gas isproduced. 

 What is X? 

# A copper(II) oxide 

 B sodium oxide 

# C copper(II) carbonate 

 D sodium carbonate 

**19** A few drops of methyl orange are added to a reaction mixture. During the reaction, a gas is produced and the methyl orange turns from red to orange. What are the reactants? **A** aqueous sodium hydroxide and ammonium chloride **B** aqueous sodium hydroxide and calcium carbonate **C** dilute hydrochloric acid and magnesium **D** dilute hydrochloric acid and aqueous sodium hydroxide 

**20** Some general rules for the solubility of salts in water are listed. ● Carbonates are insoluble (except ammonium carbonate, potassium carbonate and sodium carbonate). 

# ● Chlorides are soluble (except lead(II) chloride and silver chloride). 

 ● Nitrates are soluble. 

# ● Sulfates are soluble (except barium sulfate, calcium sulfate and lead(II) sulfate). 

 Which substances produce an insoluble salt when aqueous solutions of them are mixed? A barium chloride and magnesium nitrate B calcium chloride and ammonium nitrate C silver nitrate and zinc chloride D sodium carbonate and potassium sulfate 


© UCLES 2018 0620/22/O/N/18 

**21** Elements in Group I of the Periodic Table react with water. Which row describes the products made in the reaction and the trend in reactivity of the elements? products trend in reactivity **A** metal hydroxide and hydrogen less reactive down the group **B** metal hydroxide and hydrogen more reactive down the group **C** metal oxide and hydrogen less reactive down the group **D** metal oxide and hydrogen more reactive down the group 

**22** The equation shows the reaction between a halogen and aqueous bromide ions. 

X 2 + 2Br –^ → 2X–^ + Br (^2) ......1...... ......2...... ......3...... Which words complete gaps 1, 2 and 3? 1 2 3 **A** chlorine brown colourless **B** chlorine colourless brown **C** iodine brown colourless **D** iodine colourless brown **23** An inert gas R is used to fill weather balloons. Which descriptions of R are correct? number of outer shell electrons in atoms of R structure of gas R **A** 2 diatomic molecules **B** 2 single atoms **C** 8 diatomic molecules **D** 8 single atoms 


© UCLES 2018 0620/22/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

# 24 Heating copper(II) carbonate produces copper(II) oxide and carbon dioxide. 

# Heating the copper(II) oxide formed with carbon produces copper. 

# Which processes are involved in this conversion of copper(II) carbonate to copper? 

 A sublimation followed by oxidation B sublimation followed by reduction C thermal decomposition followed by oxidation D thermal decomposition followed by reduction 

**25** Four metals, W, X, Y and Z, are separately reacted with water and dilute hydrochloric acid. The results are shown. metal W X Y Z reaction with water fizzes no reaction fizzes vigorously 

 no reaction reaction with dilute hydrochloric acid 

 fizzes no reaction fizzes violently 

 fizzes 

 What is the order of reactivity of the four metals starting with the least reactive? least reactive most reactive A X W Z Y B X Z W Y C Y W Z X D Y Z W X 

**26** Which statement about the uses of metals is **not** correct? **A** Aluminium is used in aircraft because of its strength and good electrical conductivity. **B** Copper is used in electrical wiring because of its good electrical conductivity. **C** Stainless steel resists corrosion and is used to make cutlery. **D** Transition elements are often used as catalysts. 


© UCLES 2018 0620/22/O/N/18 

**27** Bauxite contains aluminium oxide. Aluminium is extracted from aluminium oxide by electrolysis. Why is cryolite added to the electrolytic cell used to extract aluminium? **A** Cryolite prevents the carbon anodes being burned away. **B** Cryolite removes impurities from the bauxite. **C** Cryolite increases the rate at which aluminium ions are discharged. **D** Molten cryolite dissolves the aluminium oxide. 

**28** Which statement about the Haber process is correct? **A** The hydrogen used is obtained from the air. **B** The nitrogen used is obtained from nitrates in the soil. **C** Nitrogen reacts with hydrogen to make ammonia. **D** The reaction takes place at room temperature and pressure. 

**29** Which statements about sulfur dioxide pollution are correct? 1 It increases the pH of rivers. 2 It damages limestone buildings. 3 It causes respiratory problems. **A** 1 only **B** 2 only **C** 1 and 3 **D** 2 and 3 

**30** Argon is a noble gas used to fill light bulbs. What is the approximate percentage of argon in air? **A** 1% **B** 20% **C** 79% **D** 99% 


© UCLES 2018 0620/22/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**31** The diagrams show experiments involving the rusting of iron. 

 water boiled to remove the air 

 water anhydrous calcium chloride to dry the air 

 iron nails oil 

 tube P tube Q tube R 

 A student predicted the following results. 1 In tube P, the iron nails rust. 2 In tube Q, the iron nails do not rust. 3 In tube R, the iron nails do not rust. Which predictions are correct? A 1, 2 and 3 B 1 and 2 only C 1 and 3 only D 2 and 3 only 

**32** In the carbon cycle, which two processes add carbon dioxide to the atmosphere? **A** combustion and carbonate formation **B** combustion and photosynthesis **C** combustion and respiration **D** respiration and photosynthesis 

**33** Which statement about sulfur or one of its compounds is correct? **A** Sulfur occurs naturally as the element sulfur. **B** Sulfur dioxide is used to kill bacteria in drinking water. **C** Sulfuric acid is a weak acid. **D** Dilute sulfuric acid is a dehydrating agent. 


© UCLES 2018 0620/22/O/N/18 

**34** What is **not** a use of lime? **A** It is used as a bleach in the manufacture of wood pulp. **B** It is used to desulfurise flue gases. **C** It is used to neutralise acidic industrial waste. **D** It is used to treat acidic soil. 

**35** Which equation representing a reaction of methane is correct? 

**A** CH 4 + C _l_ (^) 2 → CH 3 C _l_ + HC _l_ **B** CH 4 + C _l_ (^) 2 → CH 4 C _l_ (^) 2 **C** CH 4 + C _l_ (^) 2 → CH 2 C _l_ (^) 2 + H 2 **D** 2CH 4 + 2C _l_ (^) 2 → 2CH 3 C _l_ + C _l_ (^) 2 + H 2 **36** Which two compounds are molecules which both contain a double bond? **A** ethane and ethanoic acid **B** ethane and ethanol **C** ethene and ethanoic acid **D** ethene and ethanol **37** Ethanol can be formed by: 1 fermentation 2 reaction between steam and ethene. Which of these processes use a catalyst? 1 2 **A**   **B**   **C**   **D**   


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeInternational Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge LocalExaminations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2018 0620/22/O/N/18 

**38** Ethanol is manufactured from ethene. What is an advantage of this process? **A** It is a continuous process. **B** It has high labour costs. **C** It needs high temperature and pressure. **D** It uses non-renewable materials. 

**39** Which reaction can be used to make ethanoic acid? **A** oxidation of ethanol **B** oxidation of ethene **C** reduction of ethanol **D** reduction of ethene 

**40** The structure of an addition polymer is shown. 

 C H 

## OH 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## OH 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## OH 

## C 

## H 

## H 

 Which monomer is used to make this polymer? 

## H C H 

## H 

## OH 

## A 

## H C C 

## H 

## OH 

## H 

## H 

## OH 

## B C 

## C C 

## OH 

## H H 

## H 

## C C 

## HO 

## H OH 

## H 

## D 


© UCLES 2018 0620/22/O/N/18 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements^1 Hhydrogen^1 

(^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Beberyllium 9 **Key** atomic numberatomic symbol name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mgmagnesium 24 19 Kpotassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Srstrontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Gegermanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 (^22) Tititanium (^4840) Zrzirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rfrutherfordium– 23 Vvanadium (^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Crchromium (^5242) Momolybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sgseaborgium– (^25) Mnmanganese (^5543) Tctechnetium– (^75) Rerhenium (^186107) Bhbohrium– (^26) Feiron (^5644) Ruruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Iriridium (^192109) Mtmeitnerium– (^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pdpalladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Dsdarmstadtium– (^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rgroentgenium– (^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cdcadmium (^11280) Hgmercury (^201112) Cncopernicium– 114 F _l_ flerovium– (^116) Lvlivermorium– (^7) Nnitrogen 1415 Pphosphorus (^3133) Asarsenic (^7551) Sbantimony 12283 Bibismuth 209 (^8) Ooxygen 1616 Ssulfur (^3234) Seselenium (^7952) Tetellurium (^12884) Popolonium– (^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Brbromine 8053 I iodine 12785 Atastatine– (^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Scscandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) Lalanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). actinium– (^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium^141 (^91) Paprotactinium 231 (^60) Ndneodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pmpromethium– (^93) Npneptunium– (^62) Smsamarium (^15094) Puplutonium– (^63) Eueuropium (^15295) Amamericium– (^64) Gdgadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bkberkelium– (^66) Dydysprosium 16398 Cfcalifornium– (^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Eseinsteinium– (^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Mdmendelevium– (^70) Ybytterbium (^173102) Nonobelium– (^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lrlawrencium– 


