 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all questions. Electronic calculators may be used. You may lose marks if you do not show your working or if you do not use appropriate units. Notes for use in qualitative analysis are provided on pages 11 and 12. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/51 

 Paper 5 Practical Test October/November 2018 1 hour 15 minutes Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: As listed in the Confidential Instructions 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

 This document consists of 9 printed pages and 3 blank pages. 

 [Turn over 

 IB18 11_0620_51/FP © UCLES 2018 

# *9556806722* 

 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 For Examiner’s Use 

 1 

 2 

 3 

 Total 


**1** You are going to investigate the rate of reaction between solution **S** and solution **T** at different temperatures. When these chemicals react they form iodine. Sodium thiosulfate solution and starch solution can be used to show how fast the reaction proceeds. 

 Read all the instructions carefully before starting the experiments. 

 Instructions You are going to do four experiments. 

 Experiment 1 

 ● Place the conical flask on the white tile. Use measuring cylinder A to add 10 cm^3 of solution S to the conical flask. ● Use measuring cylinder B to add 20 cm 3 of sodium thiosulfate solution to the conical flask. ● Use the teat pipette to add about 1 cm^3 of starch solution to the mixture. ● Measure and record the initial temperature of the mixture in the table. ● Use measuring cylinder C to start the reaction by adding 10 cm^3 of solution T to the conical flask. Start the timer immediately and swirl the mixture. ● Measure the time taken for the mixture to turn blue-black and record the time taken in the table. ● Measure and record the final temperature of the mixture in the table. ● Empty the conical flask and rinse it with distilled water. 

 Experiment 2 

 ● Repeat Experiment 1 but first heat the mixture of solution S , sodium thiosulfate solution and starch solution in the conical flask to about 30 °C. ● Measure and record the initial temperature of the mixture in the table. ● Use measuring cylinder C to add 10 cm^3 of solution T to the conical flask. Start the timer immediately and swirl the mixture. ● Measure the time taken for the mixture to turn blue-black and record the time taken in the table. ● Measure and record the final temperature of the mixture in the table. ● Empty the conical flask and rinse it with distilled water. 

 Experiment 3 

 ● Repeat Experiment 2 but first heat the mixture of solution S , sodium thiosulfate solution and starch solution in the conical flask to about 40 °C before adding solution T. 

 Experiment 4 

 ● Repeat Experiment 2 but first heat the mixture of solution S , sodium thiosulfate solution and starch solution in the conical flask to about 50 °C before adding solution T. 

 (a) Record your results from Experiments 1–4 in the table. Calculate the average temperatures to complete the table. 

 experiment number 

 initial temperature / °C 

 final temperature / °C 

 average temperature / °C 

 time taken for the mixture to turn blue-black / s 

 1 

 2 

 3 

 4 

## [4] 


**©UCLES 2018 0620/51/O/N/18 [Turn over** 

 (b) Plot your results for Experiments 1–4 on the grid. Draw a smooth line graph. 

 160 

## 140 

## 120 

## 100 

## 80 

## 60 

## 40 

## 20 

## 0 

## 0 10 20 30 

 average temperature / °C 

 time taken for the mixture to turn blue-black / s 

## 40 50 60 

## [4] 

 (c) From your graph , deduce the average temperature needed for the mixture to turn blue-black in 60 s. 

 Show clearly on the grid how you worked out your answer. 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [3] 


**(d) (i)** In which experiment, 1, 2, 3 or 4, was the rate of reaction greatest? 

## ....................................................................................................................................... [1] 

 (ii) Explain, in terms of particles, why the rate of reaction was greatest in this experiment. 

## ............................................................................................................................................. 

## ............................................................................................................................................. 

## ....................................................................................................................................... [2] 

**(e)** Pipettes or burettes could be used to measure the volumes of solution **S** and the sodium thiosulfate solution more accurately. 

 State and explain one other way to improve the accuracy of the results of these experiments. 

 way to improve the accuracy ..................................................................................................... 

 explanation ................................................................................................................................ 

## .................................................................................................................................................... 

## [2] 

**(f)** A student predicted that using a burette to add solution **T** would improve the accuracy of the results of these experiments. 

 Suggest why the student’s prediction would not improve the accuracy of the results of these experiments. 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

## .............................................................................................................................................. [2] 

 [Total: 18] 


**©UCLES 2018 0620/51/O/N/18 [Turn over** 

**2** You are provided with two solids, solid **P** and solid **Q**. Do the following tests on solid **P** and solid **Q** , recording all of your observations at each stage. 

 (a) Describe the appearance of: 

 solid P ........................................................................................................................................ 

 solid Q ....................................................................................................................................... [1] 

 tests on solid P 

 Divide solid P into three portions. 

 (b) (i) Place the first portion of solid P in a boiling tube. Add a small piece of aluminium foil and about 2 cm 3 of aqueous sodium hydroxide to the boiling tube. Heat the mixture and test the gas produced with indicator paper. Record your observations. 

 ............................................................................................................................................. 

 ............................................................................................................................................. 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [2] 

 (ii) Use your results from (b)(i) to identify the gas produced. 

## ....................................................................................................................................... [1] 

 (c) (i) Place the second portion of solid P in a test-tube. Add about 2 cm 3 of distilled water to the test-tube. Stopper and shake the test-tube to dissolve solid P. Add a few drops of dilute nitric acid and about 1 cm 3 of aqueous barium nitrate. Record your observations. 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [1] 

 (ii) What conclusion can you draw about solid P from your observations in (c)(i)? 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [1] 

 (d) Do a flame test on the third portion of solid P. Record your observations. 

## .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

 (e) Identify solid P. 

## .............................................................................................................................................. [2] 


**tests on solid Q** 

**(f)** Heat about half of solid **Q** in a hard glass test-tube. Record your observations. 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

## .............................................................................................................................................. [2] 

Add about 4 cm^3 of distilled water to the rest of solid **Q** in a test-tube. Stopper and shake the test-tube to dissolve solid **Q**. 

Divide the solution into two equal portions in two test-tubes. 

**(g) (i)** Add an excess of aqueous sodium hydroxide to the first portion of the solution. Leave the mixture to stand for approximately 5 minutes. Record your observations. 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [2] 

 (ii) Add a few drops of dilute nitric acid and about 1 cm^3 of aqueous silver nitrate to the second portion of the solution. Record your observations. 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [1] 

**(h)** What conclusions can you draw about the identity of solid **Q**? 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

## .............................................................................................................................................. [2] 

 [Total: 16] 


**©UCLES 2018 0620/51/O/N/18 [Turn over** 

**3** Some cleaning products are mixtures. The three substances present in a cleaning product are listed in the table. 

 substance state at room temperature 

 physical property 

 sodium carbonate solid melts at 858 °C 

 ethanol liquid boils at 78 °C 

 limonene liquid boils at 176 °C 

 Use the information in the table to plan an experiment to obtain a sample of each substance from a mixture of the three substances. 

 You are provided with a mixture of the three substances and common laboratory apparatus. 

 ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ..................................................................................................................................................... [6] 

 [Total:6] 


## BLANK PAGE 


## BLANK PAGE 


## BLANK PAGE 


**Notes for use in qualitative analysis Tests for anions** 

 anion test test result 

 carbonate (CO 3 2–^ ) add dilute acid effervescence, carbon dioxide produced 

 chloride (C l –^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify with dilute nitric acid, then add aqueous silver nitrate 

 white ppt. 

 bromide (Br –^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify with dilute nitric acid, then add aqueous silver nitrate 

 cream ppt. 

 iodide (I–^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify with dilute nitric acid, then add aqueous silver nitrate 

 yellow ppt. 

 nitrate (NO 3 –^ ) [in solution] 

 add aqueous sodium hydroxide, then aluminium foil; warm carefully 

 ammonia produced 

 sulfate (SO 4 2–^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify, then add aqueous barium nitrate 

 white ppt. 

 sulfite (SO 3 2–^ ) add dilute hydrochloric acid, warm gently and test for the presence of sulfur dioxide 

 sulfur dioxide produced will turn acidified aqueous 

# potassium manganate(VII) from 

 purple to colourless 

**Tests for aqueous cations** 

 cation effect of aqueous sodium hydroxide effect of aqueous ammonia 

 aluminium (A l 3+^ ) white ppt., soluble in excess, giving a colourless solution 

 white ppt., insoluble in excess 

 ammonium (NH 4 +^ ) ammonia produced on warming – 

 calcium (Ca 2+^ ) white ppt., insoluble in excess no ppt., or very slight white ppt. 

# chromium(III) (Cr 3+^ ) green ppt., soluble in excess grey-green ppt., insoluble in excess 

# copper(II) (Cu 2+^ ) light blue ppt., insoluble in excess light blue ppt., soluble in excess, 

 giving a dark blue solution 

# iron(II) (Fe2+^ ) green ppt., insoluble in excess green ppt., insoluble in excess 

# iron(III) (Fe3+^ ) red-brown ppt., insoluble in excess red-brown ppt., insoluble in excess 

 zinc (Zn2+^ ) white ppt., soluble in excess, giving a colourless solution 

 white ppt., soluble in excess, giving a colourless solution 


**Permission to reproduce items w here third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared w here possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher w ill be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity.** 

**To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at w w w .cie.org.uk after the live examination series.** 

**Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment G roup. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of U niversity of Cambridge L ocal Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), w hich is itself a department of the U niversity of Cambridge.** 

**Tests for gases Flame tests for metal ions** 

 gas test and test result metal ion flame colour 

 ammonia (NH 3 ) turns damp red litmus paper blue lithium (Li +) red 

 carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) turns limewater milky sodium (Na +) yellow 

chlorine (C _l_ (^) 2 ) bleaches damp litmus paper potassium (K+) lilac 

# hydrogen (H 2 ) ‘pops’ with a lighted splint copper(II) (Cu 2+^ ) blue-green 

 oxygen (O 2 ) relights a glowing splint 

 sulfur dioxide (SO 2 ) turns acidified aqueous 

# potassium manganate(VII) from 

 purple to colourless 


