 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. IB18 11_0620_21/3RP© UCLES 2018 [Turn over 

# *4207030076* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/21 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) October/November 2018 Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet^ 45 minutes Soft clean eraserSoft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil.Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unlessthis has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

There areanswers **A** (^) , **forty B** , **C** questions on this paper. Answerand **D**. **all** questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the **one** you consider correct and record your choice in **soft pencil** on the separate Answer Sheet. **Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully.** Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer.Any rough working should be done in this booklet. A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16.Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2018 0620/21/O/N/18 

**1** When smoke particles are observed with a microscope they are seen to move around randomly.This is called Brownian motion. 

 What causes Brownian motion? A diffusion of the smoke particles B molecules in the air hitting the smoke particles C sublimation of the smoke particles D the smoke particles hitting the walls of the container 

**2** The diagrams show four pieces of laboratory equipment. balance pipette stop-clock thermometer 

 Which equipment is essential to find out if dissolving a salt in water is an exothermic process? balance pipette stop-clock thermometer A     B     C     D     


© UCLES 2018 0620/21/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**3** Iodine, I, has a lower relative atomic mass than tellurium, Te, but is placed after it in the Periodic Table. 

 Te I 

 Which statement explains why iodine is placed after tellurium in the Periodic Table? A Iodine has fewer neutrons than tellurium. B Iodine has fewer protons than tellurium. C Iodine has more neutrons than tellurium. D Iodine has more protons than tellurium. 

**4** Which statement about the isotopes of an element is correct? **A** Their physical properties are different because they have different proton numbers. **B** Their atomic masses are different because they have different numbers of electron shells. **C** They have the same chemical properties because they have the same number of electrons in their outer shells. **D** They have the same physical properties because they have the same number of neutrons intheir nuclei. 

**5** Which two molecules contain the same number of electrons? 

**A** C _l_ (^) 2 and SO 2 **B** CH 4 and H 2 O **C** CO and NH 3 **D** CO 2 and HC _l_ **6** Which statement describes the lattice structure of a metal? **A** The lattice consists of alternating positive ions and negative ions. **B** The lattice consists of neutral atoms arranged in layers. **C** The lattice consists of positive ions in a ‘sea of electrons’. **D** The lattice consists of neutral atoms in a ‘sea of electrons’. 


© UCLES 2018 0620/21/O/N/18 

**7** Which gas sample contains the most molecules? **A** 24 dm^3 of carbon dioxide, CO 2 **B** 4 g of hydrogen, H 2 **C** 36 dm^3 of hydrogen chloride, HC _l_ **D** 14 g of nitrogen, N 2 

**8** A student mixed together 25.0 cm^3 of 1.00 mol / dm^3 hydrochloric acid and 25.0 g of calcium carbonate. 

2HC _l_ (aq) + CaCO 3 (s) → CaC _l_ (^) 2 (aq) + H 2 O(l) + CO 2 (g) What is the maximum volume of carbon dioxide gas that could be collected at room temperatureand pressure? **A** 300 dm^3 **B** 6.00 dm^3 **C** 0.600 dm^3 **D** 0.300 dm^3 **9** Iron can react with sulfur to form two ionic compounds. The iron is present as Fe2+^ in one compound and as Fe 3+^ in the other compound. The sulfur ion is present as S 2–^ in both compounds. What are the formulae of the two compounds? **A** FeS and Fe 2 S 3 **B** FeS and Fe 3 S 2 **C** FeS 2 and Fe 3 S 2 **D** FeS 2 and Fe 2 S 3 

# 10 Aqueous copper(II) sulfate is electrolysed using carbon electrodes. 

 What is the product at each electrode? 

 positive electrodeproduct at the negative electrodeproduct at the A copper oxygen B hydrogen oxygen C oxygen copper D oxygen hydrogen 


© UCLES 2018 0620/21/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

# 11 The diagram shows a circuit used to electrolyse aqueous copper(II) sulfate. 

## + – 

## 2 

## 1 

## 3 4 

 copper electrodes 

 aqueous 

# copper(II) sulfate 

 power supply + – 

 Which arrows indicate the movement of the copper ions in the electrolyte and of the electrons inthe external circuit? 

 copper ions electrons A 1 3 B 1 4 C 2 3 D 2 4 

**12** Methane burns in an excess of oxygen. The equation is shown. CH 4 (g) + 2O 2 (g) → CO 2 (g) + 2H 2 O(g) The bond energies are shown in the table. bond bond energyin kJ / mol C–H +410 C=O +805 O–H +460 O=O +496 What is the energy change for the reaction? **A** +818 kJ / mol **B** +102 kJ / mol **C** –359 kJ / mol **D** –818 kJ / mol 


© UCLES 2018 0620/21/O/N/18 

**13** The equation for the formation of ammonia is shown. N 2 + 3H 2 → 2NH 3 The energy level diagram for the reaction is shown. 

 energy 

 progress of reaction 

 energy change 

## N 2 + 3H 2 

2NH (^3) total energy released = –342 kJ / mol activation energy = +250 kJ / mol What is the energy change for the reaction? **A** –592 kJ / mol **B** –92 kJ / mol **C** +92 kJ / mol **D** +592 kJ / mol **14** The effects of a change in conditions on a chemical reaction are listed. 1 The total number of collisions per minute increased. 2 The number of effective collisions per minute increased. 3 The average energy of the particles increased. Which change in conditions caused all of these effects? **A** addition of a catalyst **B** increasing the concentration of a solution of a reactant **C** increasing the surface area of a solid reactant **D** increasing the temperature 


© UCLES 2018 0620/21/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**15** When BiCreaction is shown. _l_ (^) 3 reacts with water, a white precipitate of BiOC _l_ is formed. The equation for the BiC _l_ (^) 3 (aq) + H 2 O(l) BiOC _l_ (s) + 2HC _l_ (aq) Which statements are correct? 1 The reaction is reversible. 2 When dilute hydrochloric acid is added to the reaction mixture, more of the white precipitate forms. 3 When aqueous sodium hydroxide is added to the reaction mixture, more of the whiteprecipitate forms. **A** 1, 2 and 3 **B** 1 and 2 only **C** 1 and 3 only **D** 2 and 3 only 

# 16 An excess of iron(II) chloride is added to acidified potassium manganate(VII). 

 Which statements are correct? 1 The purple colour disappears. 

# 2 Iron(II) is reduced to iron(III). 

# 3 Manganate(VII) ions are oxidised to manganese(II) ions. 

# 4 Potassium manganate(VII) is an oxidising agent. 

 A 1 and 2 B 1 and 4 C 2 and 3 D 3 and 4 

**17** Part of the Periodic Table is shown. Which element forms an oxide that reacts with dilute acid to form a salt and water? I II III IV V VI VII VIII 

## C D 

## A B 


© UCLES 2018 0620/21/O/N/18 

**18** Aqueous sodium hydroxide is added to solid Q in a test-tube. A gas is produced which turns damp red litmus blue. What is Q? **A** aluminium **B** ammonia **C** ammonium chloride **D** sodium nitrate 

**19** Potassium hydroxide is a base. Which statement describes a reaction of potassium hydroxide? **A** Chlorine is formed when it is heated with ammonium chloride. **B** It turns Universal Indicator green. **C** It reacts with an acid to produce a salt and water. **D** It turns methyl orange red. 

**20** Some general rules for the solubility of salts in water are listed. ● Carbonates are insoluble (except ammonium carbonate, potassium carbonate andsodium carbonate). 

# ● Chlorides are soluble (except lead(II) chloride and silver chloride). 

 ● Nitrates are soluble. 

# ● Sulfates are soluble (except barium sulfate, calcium sulfate and lead(II) sulfate). 

 Which substances produce an insoluble salt when aqueous solutions of them are mixed? A barium chloride and magnesium nitrate B calcium chloride and ammonium nitrate C silver nitrate and zinc chloride D sodium carbonate and potassium sulfate 


© UCLES 2018 0620/21/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**21** Elements in Group I of the Periodic Table react with water. Which row describes the products made in the reaction and the trend in reactivity of the elements? products trend in reactivity **A** metal hydroxide and hydrogen less reactive down the group **B** metal hydroxide and hydrogen more reactive down the group **C** metal oxide and hydrogen less reactive down the group **D** metal oxide and hydrogen more reactive down the group 

**22** The equation shows the reaction between a halogen and aqueous bromide ions. 

X 2 + 2Br –^ → 2X–^ + Br (^2) ......1...... ......2...... ......3...... Which words complete gaps 1, 2 and 3? 1 2 3 **A** chlorine brown colourless **B** chlorine colourless brown **C** iodine brown colourless **D** iodine colourless brown **23** An inert gas R is used to fill weather balloons. Which descriptions of R are correct? number of outer shell electrons in atoms of R structure of gas R **A** 2 diatomic molecules **B** 2 single atoms **C** 8 diatomic molecules **D** 8 single atoms 


© UCLES 2018 0620/21/O/N/18 

# 24 A student heated copper(II) carbonate and copper(II) nitrate in separate test-tubes. 

 Both compounds decomposed. Which row shows the gases produced from each reaction? 

# copper(II) carbonate copper(II) nitrate 

 A carbon dioxide nitrogen dioxide only B carbon dioxide oxygen only C carbon dioxide oxygen and nitrogen dioxide D oxygen oxygen and nitrogen dioxide 

**25** Metal X reacts with steam but not with cold water. What is X? **A** calcium **B** copper **C** sodium **D** zinc 

**26** Which row shows uses of the metals listed? 

 aluminium copper mild steel A aircraft manufacture food containers cutlery B cutlery electrical wiring chemical plant C electrical wiring aircraft manufacture cooking utensils D food containers cooking utensils car bodies 

**27** Aluminium objects do not need protection from corrosion. Iron objects must be protected from corrosion. Why does aluminium resist corrosion? **A** Aluminium does not form ions easily. **B** Aluminium does not react with water or air. **C** Aluminium has a protective oxide layer. **D** Aluminium is below iron in the reactivity series. 


© UCLES 2018 0620/21/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**28** Which statement describes the role of iron in the Haber process? **A** It is used as a catalyst. **B** It is used as a reducing agent. **C** It is used to condense the ammonia gas into a liquid. **D** It is used to increase the yield of ammonia. 

**29** Which statement about air pollutants is **not** correct? **A** Carbon monoxide is formed from the complete combustion of petroleum. **B** Lead compounds are formed from some types of petrol. **C** Oxides of nitrogen are formed from the combustion reactions inside car engines. **D** Sulfur dioxide is formed from the combustion of coal. 

**30** Argon is a noble gas used to fill light bulbs. What is the approximate percentage of argon in air? **A** 1% **B** 20% **C** 79% **D** 99% 

**31** The diagrams show experiments involving the rusting of iron. 

 water boiled to remove the air water anhydrous calcium chloride to dry the air 

 iron nails oil 

 tube P tube Q tube R 

 A student predicted the following results. 1 In tube P, the iron nails rust. 2 In tube Q, the iron nails do not rust. 3 In tube R, the iron nails do not rust. Which predictions are correct? A 1, 2 and 3 B 1 and 2 only C 1 and 3 only D 2 and 3 only 


© UCLES 2018 0620/21/O/N/18 

**32** A diagram of the carbon cycle is shown. 

 dead plants animals organisms 

 carbon dioxide 

 fossil fuels 

## W 

## X 

## X 

## Y 

 Which processes are represented by the letters W, X and Y? W X Y A photosynthesis combustion respiration B photosynthesis respiration combustion C respiration combustion photosynthesis D respiration photosynthesis combustion 

**33** Which statement about sulfur or one of its compounds is correct? **A** Sulfur occurs naturally as the element sulfur. **B** Sulfur dioxide is used to kill bacteria in drinking water. **C** Sulfuric acid is a weak acid. **D** Dilute sulfuric acid is a dehydrating agent. 

**34** Which reaction is endothermic? 

**A** CaCO 3 → CaO + CO (^2) **B** CaO + 2HC _l_ → CaC _l_ (^) 2 + H 2 O **C** 2Ca + O 2 → 2CaO **D** Ca + 2HC _l_ → CaC _l_ (^) 2 + H 2 


© UCLES 2018 0620/21/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**35** Which equation representing a reaction of methane is correct? 

**A** CH 4 + C _l_ (^) 2 → CH 3 C _l_ + HC _l_ **B** CH 4 + C _l_ (^) 2 → CH 4 C _l_ (^) 2 **C** CH 4 + C _l_ (^) 2 → CH 2 C _l_ (^) 2 + H 2 **D** 2CH 4 + 2C _l_ (^) 2 → 2CH 3 C _l_ + C _l_ (^) 2 + H 2 **36** Which two compounds are molecules which both contain a double bond? **A** ethane and ethanoic acid **B** ethane and ethanol **C** ethene and ethanoic acid **D** ethene and ethanol **37** Ethanol can be formed by: 1 fermentation 2 reaction between steam and ethene. Which of these processes use a catalyst? 1 2 **A**   **B**   **C**   **D**   **38** When the alcohol CHformed. 3 CH 2 CH 2 OH reacts with the carboxylic acid CH 3 CH 2 CH 2 COOH an ester is What is the name and structural formula of this ester? name structural formula **A** butyl propanoate CH 3 CH 2 COOCH 2 CH 2 CH 2 CH 3 **B** butyl propanoate CH 3 CH 2 CH 2 COOCH 2 CH 2 CH 3 **C** propyl butanoate CH 3 CH 2 COOCH 2 CH 2 CH 2 CH 3 **D** propyl butanoate CH 3 CH 2 CH 2 COOCH 2 CH 2 CH 3 


© UCLES 2018 0620/21/O/N/18 

**39** A solution of ethanol and water is left to stand in an open beaker in a warm room for three weeks. Which statement explains what happens to the ethanol in the solution? **A** The ethanol is dehydrated to ethene. **B** The ethanol is hydrolysed to ethene. **C** The ethanol is oxidised to ethanoic acid. **D** The ethanol is reduced to ethanoic acid. 

**40** The structure of a polymer is shown. 

 C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

CH (^3) CH (^3) 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

CH (^3) CH (^3) 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

CH (^3) CH (^3) Which monomer is used to make this polymer? 

## C 

CH 3 CH (^3) C 

## A 

## H H 

## C 

CH (^3) CH (^3) 

## C 

## B 

## H 

## H 

## C 

CH (^3) CH (^3) 

## C 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

CH (^3) CH (^3) C 

## D 

## H 

## H 


## BLANK PAGE 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeInternational Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge LocalExaminations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2018 0620/21/O/N/18 


© UCLES 2018 0620/21/O/N/18 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements^1 Hhydrogen^1 

(^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Beberyllium 9 **Key** atomic numberatomic symbol name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mgmagnesium 24 19 Kpotassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Srstrontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Gegermanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 (^22) Tititanium (^4840) Zrzirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rfrutherfordium– 23 Vvanadium (^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Crchromium (^5242) Momolybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sgseaborgium– (^25) Mnmanganese (^5543) Tctechnetium– (^75) Rerhenium (^186107) Bhbohrium– (^26) Feiron (^5644) Ruruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Iriridium (^192109) Mtmeitnerium– (^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pdpalladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Dsdarmstadtium– (^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rgroentgenium– (^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cdcadmium (^11280) Hgmercury (^201112) Cncopernicium– 114 F _l_ flerovium– (^116) Lvlivermorium– (^7) Nnitrogen 1415 Pphosphorus (^3133) Asarsenic (^7551) Sbantimony 12283 Bibismuth 209 (^8) Ooxygen 1616 Ssulfur (^3234) Seselenium (^7952) Tetellurium (^12884) Popolonium– (^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Brbromine 8053 I iodine 12785 Atastatine– (^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Scscandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) Lalanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). actinium– (^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium^141 (^91) Paprotactinium 231 (^60) Ndneodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pmpromethium– (^93) Npneptunium– (^62) Smsamarium (^15094) Puplutonium– (^63) Eueuropium (^15295) Amamericium– (^64) Gdgadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bkberkelium– (^66) Dydysprosium 16398 Cfcalifornium– (^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Eseinsteinium– (^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Mdmendelevium– (^70) Ybytterbium (^173102) Nonobelium– (^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lrlawrencium– 


