 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. IB18 11_0620_23/5RP© UCLES 2018 [Turn over 

# *9404328925* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/23 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) October/November 2018 Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet^ 45 minutes Soft clean eraserSoft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil.Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unlessthis has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

There areanswers **A** (^) , **forty B** , **C** questions on this paper. Answerand **D**. **all** questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the **one** you consider correct and record your choice in **soft pencil** on the separate Answer Sheet. **Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully.** Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer.Any rough working should be done in this booklet. A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16.Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2018 0620/23/O/N/18 

**1** Gases are separated from liquid air by fractional distillation. The boiling points of four gases areshown. 

 Which gas is both monatomic and a liquid at –200 °C? 

gas (^) pointboiling / °C **A** argon –186 **B** helium –269 **C** neon –246 **D** nitrogen –196 **2** The diagrams show four pieces of laboratory equipment. balance pipette stop-clock thermometer Which equipment is essential to find out if dissolving a salt in water is an exothermic process? balance pipette stop-clock thermometer **A**     **B**     **C**     **D**     **3** Which statement describes isotopes? **A** Isotopes of the same element have different electron arrangements. **B** Isotopes of the same element have different nuclear charges. **C** Isotopes of the same element have nuclei with masses that are the same. **D** Isotopes of the same element have the same number of protons. 


© UCLES 2018 0620/23/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**4** X and Y are both atoms. X and Y have the same chemical properties as each other. Which row describes the atomic structures of X and Y? X Y protons neutrons electrons protons neutrons electrons **A** 6 6 6 6 6 7 **B** 6 6 6 6 8 6 **C** 6 6 6 16 16 16 **D** 7 6 7 6 6 7 

**5** Which covalent molecule contains two atoms bonded together by exactly four shared electrons? **A** N 2 **B** C 3 H 8 **C** CH 3 OH **D** CH 3 COOH 

**6** The formula of ammonia is NH 3. Which statement about a molecule of ammonia is correct? **A** The bonding in a molecule of ammonia is ionic. **B** The nitrogen atom has a noble gas configuration, the hydrogen atoms do not. **C** The nitrogen atom shares all of its electrons with hydrogen atoms. **D** There are six shared electrons in a molecule of ammonia. 

**7** Which gas sample has the greatest mass? 

**A** 5.0 moles of C _l_ (^) 2 **B** 10.0 moles of O 2 **C** 15.0 moles of N 2 **D** 20.0 moles of H 2 **8** Which sample of magnesium chloride, MgC _l_ (^) 2 , contains the same number of moles as 69.6 g of potassium sulfate, K 2 SO 4? **A** 19.0 g **B** 28.5 g **C** 38.0 g **D** 47.5 g 

# 9 Iron(III) chromate is a yellow solid. It contains the ions Fe 3+^ and CrO 4 2–. 

# What is the formula of iron(III) chromate? 

**A** FeCrO 4 **B** Fe 3 (CrO 4 ) 2 **C** Fe 2 CrO 4 **D** Fe 2 (CrO 4 ) (^3) 


© UCLES 2018 0620/23/O/N/18 

# 10 Electrolysis of copper(II) sulfate can be done using either carbon electrodes or copper 

 electrodes. Which statement describes what happens at the positive electrode? A Copper is deposited if the electrode is made from carbon. B Copper is deposited if the electrode is made from copper. C Oxygen gas is produced if the electrode is made from carbon. D Oxygen gas is produced if the electrode is made from copper. 

# 11 The diagram shows a circuit used to electrolyse aqueous copper(II) sulfate. 

## + – 

## 2 

## 1 

## 3 4 

 copper electrodes 

 aqueous 

# copper(II) sulfate 

 power supply + – 

 Which arrows indicate the movement of the copper ions in the electrolyte and of the electrons in the external circuit? copper ions electrons A 1 3 B 1 4 C 2 3 D 2 4 


© UCLES 2018 0620/23/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**12** Ethene burns in oxygen to form carbon dioxide and water vapour. 

 C C 

## H H 

## H H 

## + 3 O=O → 2 O=C=O + 2 H–O–H 

 The bond energies are shown in the table. bond bond energyin kJ / mol C=C +610 C–H +410 O=O +497 C=O +805 O–H +460 What is the energy change for the reaction? A –2959 kJ / mol B –2313 kJ / mol C –1319 kJ / mol D –399 kJ / mol 


© UCLES 2018 0620/23/O/N/18 

**13** The equation for the formation of ammonia is shown. N 2 + 3H 2 → 2NH 3 The energy level diagram for the reaction is shown. 

 energy 

 progress of reaction 

 energy change 

## N 2 + 3H 2 

2NH (^3) total energy released = –342 kJ / mol activation energy = +250 kJ / mol What is the energy change for the reaction? **A** –592 kJ / mol **B** –92 kJ / mol **C** +92 kJ / mol **D** +592 kJ / mol **14** Dilute hydrochloric acid reacts with 1 g of limestone. Which conditions produce the fastest rate of reaction? **A** 2 mol / dm^3 hydrochloric acid and a single lump of limestone **B** 4 mol / dm^3 hydrochloric acid and a single lump of limestone **C** 4 mol / dm^3 hydrochloric acid and small pieces of limestone **D** 4 mol / dm^3 hydrochloric acid and powdered limestone 


© UCLES 2018 0620/23/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**15** The reversible reaction between methane and steam is shown. CH 4 (g) + H 2 O(g) CO(g) + 3H 2 (g) The forward reaction is endothermic. Which changes in pressure and temperature move the equilibrium to the right? pressure temperature **A** decrease decrease **B** decrease increase **C** increase decrease **D** increase increase 

# 16 The equation for the reaction between zinc and copper(II) oxide is shown. 

 Zn + CuO → ZnO + Cu Which row shows the oxidising agent and the reducing agent? oxidising agent reducing agent A CuO Cu B CuO Zn C Zn CuO D Zn ZnO 

**17** The results of some experiments with sulfur dioxide are shown. 

 experiment description result 1 mix with dilute hydrochloric acid does not react 2 mix with concentrated sodium hydroxide a salt forms 3 add Universal Indicator Universal Indicator turns purple 4 add acidified aqueous 

# potassium manganate(VII) 

 purple solution turns colourless Which results are correct? A 1, 2 and 4 B 2, 3 and 4 C 1 and 2 only D 3 and 4 only 


© UCLES 2018 0620/23/O/N/18 

**18** A white precipitate is produced when small amounts of two colourless solutions are mixedtogether. 

 Which pairs of solutions produce a white precipitate? 1 sodium hydroxide and zinc nitrate 2 sodium hydroxide and aluminium chloride 3 barium chloride and sulfuric acid 4 acidified barium nitrate and potassium sulfate A 1, 2, 3 and 4 B 1, 2 and 4 only C 1 and 2 only D 2 only 

**19** Solution Q is warmed with ammonium chloride. In a separate experiment, solution Q is added to methyl orange. Which observations show that solution Q is basic? 

 ammonium chloridewarmed with methyl orangeadded to A gas is produced turns red B gas is produced turns yellow C no reaction turns red D no reaction turns yellow 

**20** Some general rules for the solubility of salts in water are listed. ● Carbonates are insoluble (except ammonium carbonate, potassium carbonate and sodium carbonate). 

# ● Chlorides are soluble (except lead(II) chloride and silver chloride). 

 ● Nitrates are soluble. 

# ● Sulfates are soluble (except barium sulfate, calcium sulfate and lead(II) sulfate). 

 Which substances produce an insoluble salt when aqueous solutions of them are mixed? A barium chloride and magnesium nitrate B calcium chloride and ammonium nitrate C silver nitrate and zinc chloride D sodium carbonate and potassium sulfate 


© UCLES 2018 0620/23/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**21** Elements in Group I of the Periodic Table react with water. Which row describes the products made in the reaction and the trend in reactivity of the elements? products trend in reactivity **A** metal hydroxide and hydrogen less reactive down the group **B** metal hydroxide and hydrogen more reactive down the group **C** metal oxide and hydrogen less reactive down the group **D** metal oxide and hydrogen more reactive down the group 

**22** The equation shows the reaction between a halogen and aqueous bromide ions. 

X 2 + 2Br –^ → 2X–^ + Br (^2) ......1...... ......2...... ......3...... Which words complete gaps 1, 2 and 3? 1 2 3 **A** chlorine brown colourless **B** chlorine colourless brown **C** iodine brown colourless **D** iodine colourless brown **23** An inert gas R is used to fill weather balloons. Which descriptions of R are correct? number of outer shell electrons in atoms of R structure of gas R **A** 2 diatomic molecules **B** 2 single atoms **C** 8 diatomic molecules **D** 8 single atoms 


© UCLES 2018 0620/23/O/N/18 

# 24 Heating copper(II) carbonate produces copper(II) oxide and carbon dioxide. 

# Heating the copper(II) oxide formed with carbon produces copper. 

 Which colour changes are observed during these reactions? A green → black → brown B green → white → brown C blue → black → silver D blue → white → brown 

**25** Calcium reacts with cold water to produce hydrogen. Lead reacts slowly when heated in air to form an oxide but has almost no reaction with steam. Silver does not react with either air or water. Zinc reacts when heated with steam to produce hydrogen. What is the order of reactivity starting with the least reactive? least reactive most reactive **A** calcium lead zinc silver **B** calcium zinc lead silver **C** silver lead zinc calcium **D** silver zinc lead calcium 

**26** Which row describes the use of a metal and the property upon which the use depends? 

 metal use property A aluminium aircraft bodies aluminium is a heat conductor B aluminium cooking utensils aluminium has a low density C copper cooking utensils copper has a high density D copper electrical wiring copper is a good conductor of electricity 

**27** Which statement about the manufacture of aluminium by electrolysis is correct? **A** Aluminium ions are oxidised to aluminium by gaining electrons. **B** Aluminium is extracted from its ore hematite. **C** Molten cryolite is used to dissolve the aluminium oxide. **D** Oxygen is formed at the negative electrode. 


© UCLES 2018 0620/23/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**28** Ammonia is manufactured by the Haber process from nitrogen and hydrogen. Which row gives the main sources of these two gases? hydrogen nitrogen **A** air air **B** air natural gas **C** natural gas air **D** natural gas natural gas 

**29** Which equation represents the incomplete combustion of propane, C 3 H 8? **A** 2C 3 H 8 + 7O 2 → 6CO + 8H 2 O **B** C 3 H 8 + 5O 2 → 3CO 2 + 4H 2 O **C** 2C 3 H 8 + 11O 2 → 6CO + 16H 2 O **D** C 3 H 8 + 7O 2 → 3CO 2 + 8H 2 O 

**30** Argon is a noble gas used to fill light bulbs. What is the approximate percentage of argon in air? **A** 1% **B** 20% **C** 79% **D** 99% 


© UCLES 2018 0620/23/O/N/18 

**31** The diagrams show experiments involving the rusting of iron. 

 water boiled to remove the air 

 water anhydrous calcium chloride to dry the air 

 iron nails oil 

 tube P tube Q tube R 

 A student predicted the following results. 1 In tube P, the iron nails rust. 2 In tube Q, the iron nails do not rust. 3 In tube R, the iron nails do not rust. Which predictions are correct? A 1, 2 and 3 B 1 and 2 only C 1 and 3 only D 2 and 3 only 

**32** Which statement about the carbon cycle is correct? **A** Animals and plants need carbon dioxide for respiration. **B** Combustion of plants and natural gas produces carbon dioxide. **C** Plants produce glucose from carbon dioxide and oxygen. **D** Oxygen is produced by both animals and plants. 

**33** Which statement about sulfur or one of its compounds is correct? **A** Sulfur occurs naturally as the element sulfur. **B** Sulfur dioxide is used to kill bacteria in drinking water. **C** Sulfuric acid is a weak acid. **D** Dilute sulfuric acid is a dehydrating agent. 


© UCLES 2018 0620/23/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**34** Which equation represents the formation of lime? 

**A** CaCO 3 → CaO + CO (^2) **B** CaO + H 2 O → Ca(OH) (^2) **C** Ca + 2H 2 O → Ca(OH) 2 + H 2 **D** Ca(OH) 2 + CO 2 → CaCO 3 + H 2 O **35** Which equation representing a reaction of methane is correct? **A** CH 4 + C _l_ (^) 2 → CH 3 C _l_ + HC _l_ **B** CH 4 + C _l_ (^) 2 → CH 4 C _l_ (^) 2 **C** CH 4 + C _l_ (^) 2 → CH 2 C _l_ (^) 2 + H 2 **D** 2CH 4 + 2C _l_ (^) 2 → 2CH 3 C _l_ + C _l_ (^) 2 + H 2 **36** Which two compounds are molecules which both contain a double bond? **A** ethane and ethanoic acid **B** ethane and ethanol **C** ethene and ethanoic acid **D** ethene and ethanol **37** Ethanol can be formed by: 1 fermentation 2 reaction between steam and ethene. Which of these processes use a catalyst? 1 2 **A**   **B**   **C**   **D**   


© UCLES 2018 0620/23/O/N/18 

**38** Sugar can be fermented to produce ethanol. Some of the stages in the process to produce and purify ethanol are listed. 1 Leave in a warm place. 2 Add yeast. 3 Fractionally distil the solution. 4 Dissolve the sugar in water. 5 Filter to remove the yeast. 6 Crush some sugar cane. What is the correct order of these stages? **A** 4 → 6 → 2 → 1 → 5 → 3 **B** 6 → 4 → 1 → 2 → 5 → 3 **C** 6 → 4 → 2 → 1 → 3 → 5 **D** 6 → 4 → 2 → 1 → 5 → 3 

**39** Which statement about ethanoic acid is correct? **A** It contains a –C 2 H 5 group. **B** It is a strong acid. **C** It is formed by the reduction of ethanol. **D** It reacts with alcohols to form esters. 

**40** The structure of a polymer is shown. 

 C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

 C l 

 C l 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

 C l 

 C l 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

 C l 

 C l Which monomer is used to make this polymer? 

## C 

 C l C l C H H 

## C C 

 C l 

 C l C l 

 C l C 

## H 

## H 

## A 

## C 

 C l 

 C l 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## B D 

## C C 

 C l 

 C l C l 

 C l C 

## H H 

## H 

## C H 

## C 


## BLANK PAGE 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeInternational Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge LocalExaminations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2018 0620/23/O/N/18 


© UCLES 2018 0620/23/O/N/18 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements^1 Hhydrogen^1 

(^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Beberyllium 9 **Key** atomic numberatomic symbol name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mgmagnesium 24 19 Kpotassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Srstrontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Gegermanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 (^22) Tititanium (^4840) Zrzirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rfrutherfordium– 23 Vvanadium (^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Crchromium (^5242) Momolybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sgseaborgium– (^25) Mnmanganese (^5543) Tctechnetium– (^75) Rerhenium (^186107) Bhbohrium– (^26) Feiron (^5644) Ruruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Iriridium (^192109) Mtmeitnerium– (^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pdpalladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Dsdarmstadtium– (^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rgroentgenium– (^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cdcadmium (^11280) Hgmercury (^201112) Cncopernicium– 114 F _l_ flerovium– (^116) Lvlivermorium– (^7) Nnitrogen 1415 Pphosphorus (^3133) Asarsenic (^7551) Sbantimony 12283 Bibismuth 209 (^8) Ooxygen 1616 Ssulfur (^3234) Seselenium (^7952) Tetellurium (^12884) Popolonium– (^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Brbromine 8053 I iodine 12785 Atastatine– (^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Scscandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) Lalanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). actinium– (^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium^141 (^91) Paprotactinium 231 (^60) Ndneodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pmpromethium– (^93) Npneptunium– (^62) Smsamarium (^15094) Puplutonium– (^63) Eueuropium (^15295) Amamericium– (^64) Gdgadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bkberkelium– (^66) Dydysprosium 16398 Cfcalifornium– (^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Eseinsteinium– (^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Mdmendelevium– (^70) Ybytterbium (^173102) Nonobelium– (^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lrlawrencium– 


