 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 16 printed pages. 

 IB18 11_0620_11/3RP © UCLES 2018 [Turn over 

# *9115702337* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/11 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) October/November 2018 

 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2018 0620/11/O/N/18 

**1** A beaker containing solid carbon dioxide is placed in a fume cupboard at room temperature. The carbon dioxide becomes gaseous. 

 Which process describes this change of state? 

 A boiling 

 B condensation 

 C evaporation 

 D sublimation 

**2** The pressure of a sample of gas is decreased. The temperature is kept constant. 

 Which row describes the effects on the particles? 

 movement of particles collisions between particles 

 A slower occur less often 

 B slower occur with more force 

 C no change in speed occur less often 

 D no change in speed occur with more force 

**3** Which statement about paper chromatography is correct? 

 A A solvent is needed to dissolve the paper. 

 B Paper chromatography separates mixtures of solvents. 

 C The solvent should cover the baseline. 

 D The baseline should be drawn in pencil. 


© UCLES 2018 0620/11/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**4** The diagrams show four pieces of laboratory equipment. 

 balance pipette stop-clock thermometer 

 Which equipment is essential to find out if dissolving a salt in water is an exothermic process? 

 balance pipette stop-clock thermometer 

 A     

 B     

 C     

 D     

**5** Iodine, I, has a lower relative atomic mass than tellurium, Te, but is placed after it in the Periodic Table. 

 Te I 

 Which statement explains why iodine is placed after tellurium in the Periodic Table? 

 A Iodine has fewer neutrons than tellurium. 

 B Iodine has fewer protons than tellurium. 

 C Iodine has more neutrons than tellurium. 

 D Iodine has more protons than tellurium. 


© UCLES 2018 0620/11/O/N/18 

**6** Substance Q has a high melting point and conducts electricity both when molten and when dissolved in water. 

 What is Q? 

 A calcium chloride 

 B diamond 

 C iron 

 D silver chloride 

**7** Elements X and Y form an ionic compound, XY. 

 In which group of the Periodic Table is X found and how is the bond between X and Y formed? 

 group in which X is found 

 how the bond between X and Y is formed 

 A I by X gaining one electron from Y 

 B I by X transferring one electron to Y 

 C VII by X sharing electrons with Y 

 D VII by X transferring one electron to Y 

**8** The structure of glycine is shown. 

## N C 

## H O 

## H O 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

 Which row is correct? 

formula of glycine (^) elements in glycinenumber of different 

## A CH 5 O 2 N 10 

## B C 2 H 5 O 2 N 4 

## C C 2 H 5 O 2 N 10 

## D H 2 NCHCOOH 4 


© UCLES 2018 0620/11/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**9** Calcium phosphate forms when calcium chloride and sodium phosphate solutions react together. 

_x_ CaC _l_ (^) 2 + _y_ Na 3 PO 4 → 2Ca 3 (PO 4 ) 2 + 12NaC _l_ Which values of _x_ and _y_ balance the equation? _x y_ **A** 2 2 **B** 3 4 **C** 6 3 **D** 6 4 **10** During the electrolysis of concentrated aqueous sodium chloride, chlorine gas is produced at the positive electrode. What happens at the negative electrode and to the solution? product at the negative electrode the solution becomes **A** hydrogen acidic **B** hydrogen alkaline **C** sodium acidic **D** sodium alkaline 


© UCLES 2018 0620/11/O/N/18 

**11** The diagram shows an experiment to electroplate a nickel spoon with silver. 

 electrolyte 

 nickel spoon 

 power supply 

 Which row correctly describes the positive electrode, the negative electrode and the electrolyte? 

 positive electrode 

 negative electrode electrolyte 

 A nickel spoon pure nickel silver nitrate solution 

 B nickel spoon pure silver nickel nitrate solution 

 C pure nickel nickel spoon silver nitrate solution 

 D pure silver nickel spoon silver nitrate solution 

**12** Which substance does **not** use oxygen to produce heat energy? 

 A coal 

 B hydrogen 

 C natural gas 

 D uranium 


© UCLES 2018 0620/11/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**13** An energy level diagram for a reaction is shown. 

 energy 

 progress of reaction 

 reactants 

 products 

 Which statement about the reaction is correct? 

 A Heat is released. 

 B It is a combustion reaction. 

 C It is an endothermic reaction. 

 D The temperature increases. 

**14** Two reactions are done. 

# 1 Hydrated cobalt(II) chloride is heated. It changes colour. 

 2 Water is added to the product of reaction 1. It becomes hotter. The original colour is produced. 

 Which types of reaction have occurred in reactions 1 and 2? 

 endothermic exothermic neutralisation reversible 

 A     

 B     

 C     

 D     

**15** Which equation shows reduction of an iron compound? 

 A 4Fe + 3O 2 → 2Fe 2 O 3 

**B** Fe + 2HC _l_ → FeC _l_ (^) 2 + H 2 **C** 4FeO + O 2 → 2Fe 2 O 3 **D** Fe 2 O 3 + 3CO → 2Fe + 3CO 2 


© UCLES 2018 0620/11/O/N/18 

**16** Calcium carbonate reacts with dilute hydrochloric acid to make carbon dioxide gas. Graph X shows the results of this experiment. 

 The particle size of the calcium carbonate is increased and the experiment is repeated. All other conditions are kept the same. Graph Y shows the results of this experiment. 

 Which diagram is correct for the two experiments? 

 volume of carbon dioxide produced / cm 3 

 time / s 

## A 

## X 

## Y 

 volume of carbon dioxide produced / cm^3 

 time / s 

## B 

## X 

## Y 

## Y 

## X 

 volume of carbon dioxide produced / cm 3 

 time / s 

## C 

## Y 

## X 

 volume of carbon dioxide produced / cm^3 

 time / s 

## D 

## 0 

## 0 

## 0 

## 0 

## 0 

## 0 

## 0 

## 0 

**17** Part of the Periodic Table is shown. 

 Which element forms an oxide that reacts with dilute acid to form a salt and water? 

 I II III IV V VI VII VIII 

## C D 

## A B 


© UCLES 2018 0620/11/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**18** An excess of substance Z is added to some spilt acid. 

 The solution produced as a result is neutral. 

 What is Z? 

 A aqueous ammonia 

 B aqueous sodium hydroxide 

 C calcium carbonate 

 D water 

**19** Aqueous sodium hydroxide is added to solid Q in a test-tube. 

 A gas is produced which turns damp red litmus blue. 

 What is Q? 

 A aluminium 

 B ammonia 

 C ammonium chloride 

 D sodium nitrate 

**20** Potassium hydroxide is a base. 

 Which statement describes a reaction of potassium hydroxide? 

 A Chlorine is formed when it is heated with ammonium chloride. 

 B It turns Universal Indicator green. 

 C It reacts with an acid to produce a salt and water. 

 D It turns methyl orange red. 

**21** Which statement about the Periodic Table is **not** correct? 

 A It can be used to find the atomic number of an element. 

 B It can be used to find the physical state of an element. 

 C It can be used to find the symbol of an element. 

 D It can be used to predict the properties of an element. 


© UCLES 2018 0620/11/O/N/18 

**22** Elements in Group I of the Periodic Table react with water. 

 Which row describes the products made in the reaction and the trend in reactivity of the elements? 

 products trend in reactivity 

 A metal hydroxide and hydrogen less reactive down the group 

 B metal hydroxide and hydrogen more reactive down the group 

 C metal oxide and hydrogen less reactive down the group 

 D metal oxide and hydrogen more reactive down the group 

**23** The equation shows the reaction between a halogen and aqueous bromide ions. 

X 2 + 2Br –^ → 2X–^ + Br (^2) ......1...... ......2...... ......3...... Which words complete gaps 1, 2 and 3? 

## 1 2 3 

 A chlorine brown colourless 

 B chlorine colourless brown 

 C iodine brown colourless 

 D iodine colourless brown 

**24** An inert gas R is used to fill weather balloons. 

 Which descriptions of R are correct? 

 number of outer shell electrons in atoms of R 

 structure of gas R 

 A 2 diatomic molecules 

 B 2 single atoms 

 C 8 diatomic molecules 

 D 8 single atoms 


© UCLES 2018 0620/11/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**25** Metal X reacts with steam but not with cold water. 

 What is X? 

 A calcium 

 B copper 

 C sodium 

 D zinc 

**26** Which process is used to extract aluminium from bauxite? 

 A heating bauxite in air 

 B heating bauxite with carbon 

 C heating bauxite with hydrogen 

 D passing electricity through purified bauxite 

**27** Which row shows uses of the metals listed? 

 aluminium copper mild steel 

 A aircraft manufacture food containers cutlery 

 B cutlery electrical wiring chemical plant 

 C electrical wiring aircraft manufacture cooking utensils 

 D food containers cooking utensils car bodies 

**28** Argon is a noble gas used to fill light bulbs. 

 What is the approximate percentage of argon in air? 

 A 1% B 20% C 79% D 99% 


© UCLES 2018 0620/11/O/N/18 

**29** The diagrams show experiments involving the rusting of iron. 

 water boiled to remove the air 

 water anhydrous calcium chloride to dry the air 

 oil iron nails 

 tube P tube Q tube R 

 A student predicted the following results. 

 1 In tube P, the iron nails rust. 

 2 In tube Q, the iron nails do not rust. 

 3 In tube R, the iron nails do not rust. 

 Which predictions are correct? 

 A 1, 2 and 3 B 1 and 2 only C 1 and 3 only D 2 and 3 only 

**30** Which statement about air pollutants is **not** correct? 

 A Carbon monoxide is formed from the complete combustion of petroleum. 

 B Lead compounds are formed from some types of petrol. 

 C Oxides of nitrogen are formed from the combustion reactions inside car engines. 

 D Sulfur dioxide is formed from the combustion of coal. 


© UCLES 2018 0620/11/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**31** The table describes three types of water. 

 water type 

 source of water 

 appearance before treatment treatment^ 

 appearance after treatment 

 P river muddy none muddy 

 Q river muddy filtration and chlorination clear 

 R well clear chlorination only clear 

 Which statement is correct? 

 A Only Q and R are suitable for drinking, while P could be used for irrigation. 

 B Only Q and R are suitable for drinking, while P is unsuitable for any purpose. 

 C Only Q is suitable for drinking. R could be used for washing cars and P for irrigation. 

 D P, Q and R are suitable for irrigation and washing cars, but are not suitable for drinking. 

**32** Which compound would **not** be used as an important part of a garden fertiliser? 

 A Ca 3 (PO 4 ) 2 B KNO 3 C Mg(OH) 2 D (NH 4 ) 2 SO 4 

**33** Carbon dioxide and methane both contribute to climate change. 

 Which process produces both gases? 

 A complete combustion of natural gas 

 B farming cattle 

 C heating calcium carbonate 

 D respiration 

**34** Which reaction is endothermic? 

**A** CaCO 3 → CaO + CO (^2) **B** CaO + 2HC _l_ → CaC _l_ (^) 2 + H 2 O **C** 2Ca + O 2 → 2CaO **D** Ca + 2HC _l_ → CaC _l_ (^) 2 + H 2 


© UCLES 2018 0620/11/O/N/18 

**35** Petroleum is a mixture of different hydrocarbons. 

 Which process is used to separate the petroleum into groups of similar hydrocarbons? 

 A combustion 

 B cracking 

 C fractional distillation 

 D reduction 

**36** Which two compounds are molecules which both contain a double bond? 

 A ethane and ethanoic acid 

 B ethane and ethanol 

 C ethene and ethanoic acid 

 D ethene and ethanol 

**37** Which pair of diagrams shows compounds belonging to the same homologous series? 

## O 

## O 

## H C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## O 

## O 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## A H C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H C C C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## B 

## H C 

## H 

## H 

## O H 

## O 

## H O 

## C C 

## H C H 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C H C O 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## D C H 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2018 0620/11/O/N/18 

**38** Ethanol can be formed by: 

 1 fermentation 

 2 reaction between steam and ethene. 

 Which of these processes use a catalyst? 

## 1 2 

## A   

## B   

## C   

## D   

**39** Which statement about ethanoic acid is correct? 

 A It fizzes with magnesium ribbon. 

 B It forms a salt with hydrochloric acid. 

 C It is a hydrocarbon. 

 D It forms a solution in water with a pH greater than pH 7. 

**40** Which statement about _Terylene_ is correct? 

 A It is a form of protein. 

 B It is a natural polymer. 

 C It is also called poly(ethene). 

 D It is used to make clothes. 


© UCLES 2018 0620/11/O/N/18 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements 

(^1) H hydrogen 1 (^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III IV V^ VI VII VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Be beryllium 9 atomic number atomic symbol **Key**^ name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mg magnesium 24 19 K potassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Sr strontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Ge germanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 (^22) Tititanium (^4840) Zr zirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rf rutherfordium 

- 

 23 V vanadium 

(^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Cr chromium (^5242) Mo molybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sg seaborgium 

- 

(^25) Mn manganese (^5543) Tc technetium – (^75) Re rhenium^186107 Bhbohrium 

- 

(^26) Feiron (^5644) Ru ruthenium^101 (^76) Ososmium (^190108) Hs hassium 

- 

(^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Iriridium (^192109) Mt meitnerium 

- 

(^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pd palladium^106 (^78) Ptplatinum (^195110) Ds darmstadtium 

- 

(^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rg roentgenium 

- 

(^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cd cadmium^112 (^80) Hgmercury (^201112) Cn copernicium 

- 

 114 F 

 l flerovium 

- 

(^116) Lv livermorium 

- 

(^7) N nitrogen^1415 Pphosphorus^3133 Asarsenic^7551 Sbantimony^12283 Bibismuth^209 (^8) O oxygen^1616 Ssulfur^3234 Seselenium^7952 Tetellurium^12884 Popolonium 

- 

(^9) F fluorine^1917 C _l_ chlorine35.5^35 Brbromine^8053 I iodine 12785 At astatine 

- 

(^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Sc scandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71 lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) La lanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). actinium 

- 

(^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium (^14191) Pa protactinium 231 (^60) Nd neodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pm promethium – (^93) Np neptunium 

- 

(^62) Sm samarium^150 (^94) Pu plutonium 

- 

(^63) Eu europium^152 (^95) Am americium 

- 

(^64) Gd gadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bk berkelium 

- 

(^66) Dy dysprosium 16398 Cf californium 

- 

(^67) Ho holmium^165 (^99) Es einsteinium 

- 

(^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Md mendelevium 

- 

(^70) Yb ytterbium^173102 Nonobelium 

- 

(^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lr lawrencium 

- 


