 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 16 printed pages. IB18 11_0620_13/4RP© UCLES 2018 [Turn over 

# *1803649773* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/13 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) October/November 2018 Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet^ 45 minutes Soft clean eraserSoft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil.Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unlessthis has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

There areanswers **A** (^) , **forty B** , **C** questions on this paper. Answerand **D**. **all** questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the **one** you consider correct and record your choice in **soft pencil** on the separate Answer Sheet. **Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully.** Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer.Any rough working should be done in this booklet. A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16.Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2018 0620/13/O/N/18 

**1** The statements describe two changes of state. 1 The molecules of substance X are arranged randomly. During the change of state, they lose energy and become more ordered. Themolecules can still move freely. 2 The molecules of substance Y are arranged in a regular lattice.During the change of state, they gain energy and become less ordered. The molecules are still close together. Which changes of state are described by the statements? 1 2 **A** condensation evaporation **B** condensation melting **C** freezing evaporation **D** freezing melting 

**2** Which statement about gases is correct? **A** Gases are difficult to compress when pressure is applied. **B** The particles in gases are close together. **C** The particles in gases have a random arrangement. **D** The particles in gases move slowly past each other. 

**3** Salt is added to pure water to form an aqueous solution. Which statement is correct? **A** The melting point and the boiling point of the water both decrease. **B** The melting point and the boiling point of the water both increase. **C** The melting point of the water decreases but its boiling point increases. **D** The melting point of the water increases but its boiling point decreases. 


© UCLES 2018 0620/13/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**4** The diagrams show four pieces of laboratory equipment. balance pipette stop-clock thermometer 

 Which equipment is essential to find out if dissolving a salt in water is an exothermic process? balance pipette stop-clock thermometer A     B     C     D     

**5** Which statement describes isotopes? **A** Isotopes of the same element have different electron arrangements. **B** Isotopes of the same element have different nuclear charges. **C** Isotopes of the same element have nuclei with masses that are the same. **D** Isotopes of the same element have the same number of protons. 

**6** Substance X conducts electricity. What is X? **A** a typical covalent compound in the liquid state **B** a typical covalent compound in the solid state **C** a typical ionic compound in the liquid state **D** a typical ionic compound in the solid state 


© UCLES 2018 0620/13/O/N/18 

**7** Which statement describes the elements in Group I? **A** They all form ions by gaining electrons. **B** They all form ions with the same charge. **C** They have different numbers of electrons in their outer shells. **D** They all have the same number of electron shells. 

**8** Calcium phosphate has the formula Ca 3 (PO 4 ) 2. What is the relative formula mass of calcium phosphate? **A** 135 **B** 215 **C** 230 **D** 310 

**9** Limestone fizzes and dissolves in dilute hydrochloric acid. What is the word equation for the reaction which occurs? **A** calcium carbonate + hydrochloric acid → calcium chloride + water + carbon dioxide **B** calcium carbonate + hydrochloric acid → calcium chloride + hydrogen **C** calcium hydroxide + hydrochloric acid → calcium chloride + water **D** calcium oxide + hydrochloric acid → calcium chloride + water 

**10** When solution Q is electrolysed using carbon electrodes, colourless gases are produced at both electrodes. What is Q? **A** concentrated hydrochloric acid **B** concentrated sodium chloride solution **C** dilute sulfuric acid **D** pure water 

**11** Which electrodes and electrolyte can be used to electroplate a copper medal with gold? 

 positive electrode negative electrode electrolyte A copper gold an aqueous copper compound B copper gold an aqueous gold compound C gold copper an aqueous copper compound D gold copper an aqueous gold compound 


© UCLES 2018 0620/13/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**12** Which substance does **not** use oxygen to produce heat energy? **A** coal **B** hydrogen **C** natural gas **D** uranium 


© UCLES 2018 0620/13/O/N/18 

**13** Which row describes an endothermic reaction? 

 energy level diagram energy transfer 

 A energy 

 progress of reaction 

 from the surroundings^ energy is transferred to the reaction 

 B energy 

 progress of reaction 

 from the surroundings^ energy is transferred to the reaction 

 C energy 

 progress of reaction 

 energy is transferred from the reaction to the surroundings 

 D energy 

 progress of reaction 

 energy is transferred to the surroundingsfrom the reaction 


© UCLES 2018 0620/13/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

# 14 When solid hydrated cobalt(II) chloride crystals are heated they turn blue and steam is produced. 

 Adding water to the blue crystals turns them pink. Which type of reaction has occurred? A neutralisation B oxidation C reduction D reversible 

# 15 Iron(III) oxide reacts with carbon monoxide. 

 The equation is shown. Fe 2 O 3 + 3CO → 2Fe + 3CO 2 Which substance is reduced? A CO B CO 2 C Fe D Fe 2 O 3 

**16** In Experiment 1, 1 g of calcium carbonate is reacted with an excess of dilute hydrochloric acid. The volume of gas produced every minute is recorded. In Experiment 2, Experiment 1 is repeated using smaller pieces of calcium carbonate. All other conditions are kept the same. The results from both experiments are shown. time / s 0 60 120 180 240 volume of gas fromExperiment 1 / cm 3 0 98 172 212 220 volume of gas from Experiment 2 / cm^3 0 157 209 220 220 Which statement about Experiment 2 is correct? **A** The rate of reaction is faster than in Experiment 1 and there is the same amount of product. **B** The rate of reaction is faster than in Experiment 1 and there is more product. **C** The rate of reaction is the same as in Experiment 1 and there is the same amount of product. **D** The rate of reaction is the same as in Experiment 1 and there is more product. 


© UCLES 2018 0620/13/O/N/18 

**17** The results of some experiments with sulfur dioxide are shown. 

 experiment description result 1 mix with dilute hydrochloric acid does not react 2 mix with concentrated sodium hydroxide a salt forms 3 add Universal Indicator Universal Indicatorturns purple 

(^4) potassium manganate(add acidified aqueousVII) turns colourlesspurple solution Which results are correct? **A** 1, 2 and 4 **B** 2, 3 and 4 **C** 1 and 2 only **D** 3 and 4 only 

# 18 A student prepares solid hydrated copper(II) sulfate from dilute sulfuric acid and the insoluble 

# base copper(II) oxide. 

 Which process is not used in the procedure? A crystallisation B distillation C evaporation D filtration 

**19** A white precipitate is produced when small amounts of two colourless solutions are mixed together. Which pairs of solutions produce a white precipitate? 1 sodium hydroxide and zinc nitrate 2 sodium hydroxide and aluminium chloride 3 barium chloride and sulfuric acid 4 acidified barium nitrate and potassium sulfate **A** 1, 2, 3 and 4 **B** 1, 2 and 4 only **C** 1 and 2 only **D** 2 only 


© UCLES 2018 0620/13/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**20** Solution Q is warmed with ammonium chloride. In a separate experiment, solution Q is added to methyl orange. Which observations show that solution Q is basic? warmed with ammonium chloride 

 added to methyl orange A gas is produced turns red B gas is produced turns yellow C no reaction turns red D no reaction turns yellow 

**21** Which statement about elements in the Periodic Table is correct? **A** Elements are arranged in order of increasing nucleon number. **B** Elements change from non-metallic to metallic across a period. **C** Elements in the same period have similar properties. **D** Elements on the left of the Periodic Table form basic oxides. 

**22** Elements in Group I of the Periodic Table react with water. Which row describes the products made in the reaction and the trend in reactivity of the elements? products trend in reactivity **A** metal hydroxide and hydrogen less reactive down the group **B** metal hydroxide and hydrogen more reactive down the group **C** metal oxide and hydrogen less reactive down the group **D** metal oxide and hydrogen more reactive down the group 


© UCLES 2018 0620/13/O/N/18 

**23** The equation shows the reaction between a halogen and aqueous bromide ions. 

X 2 + 2Br –^ → 2X–^ + Br (^2) ......1...... ......2...... ......3...... Which words complete gaps 1, 2 and 3? 1 2 3 **A** chlorine brown colourless **B** chlorine colourless brown **C** iodine brown colourless **D** iodine colourless brown **24** An inert gas R is used to fill weather balloons. Which descriptions of R are correct? number of outer shell electrons in atoms of R structure of gas R **A** 2 diatomic molecules **B** 2 single atoms **C** 8 diatomic molecules **D** 8 single atoms **25** Calcium reacts with cold water to produce hydrogen. Lead reacts slowly when heated in air to form an oxide but has almost no reaction with steam. Silver does not react with either air or water. Zinc reacts when heated with steam to produce hydrogen. What is the order of reactivity starting with the least reactive? least reactive most reactive **A** calcium lead zinc silver **B** calcium zinc lead silver **C** silver lead zinc calcium **D** silver zinc lead calcium 


© UCLES 2018 0620/13/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**26** Iron and potassium are both metals. Which row shows the reactivity of the metal and how it is extracted from its ore? metal reactivity extracted by **A** iron high electrolysis **B** iron medium heating with carbon **C** potassium medium electrolysis **D** potassium high heating with carbon 

**27** Which row describes the use of a metal and the property upon which the use depends? 

 metal use property A aluminium aircraft bodies aluminium is a heat conductor B aluminium cooking utensils aluminium has a low density C copper cooking utensils copper has a high density D copper electrical wiring copper is a good conductor of electricity 

**28** Argon is a noble gas used to fill light bulbs. What is the approximate percentage of argon in air? **A** 1% **B** 20% **C** 79% **D** 99% 


© UCLES 2018 0620/13/O/N/18 

**29** The diagrams show experiments involving the rusting of iron. 

 water boiled to remove the air 

 water anhydrous calcium chloride to dry the air 

 iron nails oil 

 tube P tube Q tube R 

 A student predicted the following results. 1 In tube P, the iron nails rust. 2 In tube Q, the iron nails do not rust. 3 In tube R, the iron nails do not rust. Which predictions are correct? A 1, 2 and 3 B 1 and 2 only C 1 and 3 only D 2 and 3 only 

**30** Which equation represents the incomplete combustion of propane, C 3 H 8? **A** 2C 3 H 8 + 7O 2 → 6CO + 8H 2 O **B** C 3 H 8 + 5O 2 → 3CO 2 + 4H 2 O **C** 2C 3 H 8 + 11O 2 → 6CO + 16H 2 O **D** C 3 H 8 + 7O 2 → 3CO 2 + 8H 2 O 


© UCLES 2018 0620/13/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**31** The table describes three types of water. 

 watertype source ofwater appearance beforetreatment treatment appearance aftertreatment P river muddy none muddy Q river muddy filtration and chlorination clear R well clear chlorination only clear Which statement is correct? A Only Q and R are suitable for drinking, while P could be used for irrigation. B Only Q and R are suitable for drinking, while P is unsuitable for any purpose. C Only Q is suitable for drinking. R could be used for washing cars and P for irrigation. D P, Q and R are suitable for irrigation and washing cars, but are not suitable for drinking. 

**32** Which compound would **not** be used as an important part of a garden fertiliser? **A** Ca 3 (PO 4 ) 2 **B** KNO 3 **C** Mg(OH) 2 **D** (NH 4 ) 2 SO 4 

**33** Carbon dioxide and methane both contribute to climate change. Which process produces both gases? **A** complete combustion of natural gas **B** farming cattle **C** heating calcium carbonate **D** respiration 

**34** Which equation represents the formation of lime? 

**A** CaCO 3 → CaO + CO (^2) **B** CaO + H 2 O → Ca(OH) (^2) **C** Ca + 2H 2 O → Ca(OH) 2 + H 2 **D** Ca(OH) 2 + CO 2 → CaCO 3 + H 2 O 


© UCLES 2018 0620/13/O/N/18 

**35** Petroleum is a mixture of different hydrocarbons. Which process is used to separate the petroleum into groups of similar hydrocarbons? **A** combustion **B** cracking **C** fractional distillation **D** reduction 

**36** Which two compounds are molecules which both contain a double bond? **A** ethane and ethanoic acid **B** ethane and ethanol **C** ethene and ethanoic acid **D** ethene and ethanol 

**37** Which statement about any homologous series is correct? **A** The first member contains one carbon atom only. **B** The members all contain carbon and hydrogen only. **C** The members all contain the same functional group. **D** The members all contain the same number of carbon atoms. 

**38** Ethanol can be formed by: 1 fermentation 2 reaction between steam and ethene. Which of these processes use a catalyst? 1 2 **A**   **B**   **C**   **D**   


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeInternational Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge LocalExaminations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2018 0620/13/O/N/18 

**39** Which statement about ethanoic acid is **not** correct? **A** It is insoluble in water. **B** It reacts with sodium hydroxide to form a salt. **C** It reacts with some metals to form hydrogen gas. **D** It is a carboxylic acid. 

**40** Some information about poly(ethene) is given. ● Poly(ethene) is used to make plastic bags. ● Poly(ethene) plastic bags in landfill sites do not readily decompose. ● Poly(ethene) molecules contain carbon and hydrogen atoms. Which statement about poly(ethene) is correct? **A** It is biodegradable. **B** It is combustible. **C** It is unsaturated. **D** It reacts with water. 


© UCLES 2018 0620/13/O/N/18 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements^1 Hhydrogen^1 

(^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Beberyllium 9 **Key** atomic numberatomic symbol name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mgmagnesium 24 19 Kpotassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Srstrontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Gegermanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 (^22) Tititanium (^4840) Zrzirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rfrutherfordium– 23 Vvanadium (^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Crchromium (^5242) Momolybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sgseaborgium– (^25) Mnmanganese (^5543) Tctechnetium– (^75) Rerhenium (^186107) Bhbohrium– (^26) Feiron (^5644) Ruruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Iriridium (^192109) Mtmeitnerium– (^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pdpalladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Dsdarmstadtium– (^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rgroentgenium– (^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cdcadmium (^11280) Hgmercury (^201112) Cncopernicium– 114 F _l_ flerovium– (^116) Lvlivermorium– (^7) Nnitrogen 1415 Pphosphorus (^3133) Asarsenic (^7551) Sbantimony 12283 Bibismuth 209 (^8) Ooxygen 1616 Ssulfur (^3234) Seselenium (^7952) Tetellurium (^12884) Popolonium– (^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Brbromine 8053 I iodine 12785 Atastatine– (^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Scscandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) Lalanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). actinium– (^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium^141 (^91) Paprotactinium 231 (^60) Ndneodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pmpromethium– (^93) Npneptunium– (^62) Smsamarium (^15094) Puplutonium– (^63) Eueuropium (^15295) Amamericium– (^64) Gdgadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bkberkelium– (^66) Dydysprosium 16398 Cfcalifornium– (^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Eseinsteinium– (^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Mdmendelevium– (^70) Ybytterbium (^173102) Nonobelium– (^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lrlawrencium– 


