 This document consists of 10 printed pages and 2 blank pages. 

 DC (LEG/JG) 91116/1 © UCLES 2015 [Turn over 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

* 5 1 6 3 1 1 5 6 0 3 * 

 PHYSICS 0625/51 Paper 5 Practical Test May/June 2015 1 hour 15 minutes Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: As listed in the Confidential Instructions. 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name in the spaces at the top of the page. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all questions. Electronic calculators may be used. You may lose marks if you do not show your working or if you do not use appropriate units. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. 

 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 For Examiner’s Use 

 1 

 2 

 3 

 4 

 Total 


© UCLES 2015 0625/51/M/J/15 

**1** In this experiment, you will determine the weight of a metre rule using a balancing method. 

 Carry out the following instructions, referring to Fig. 1.1. 

## P 

 x y 

 bench 

 metre rule 

 pivot 

 50.0 cm mark 

 9 0.0 cm mark 

 Fig. 1.1 

 (a) Place the metre rule on the pivot. Place the load P on the metre rule at the 90.0 cm mark. 

 Keeping P at the 90.0 cm mark, adjust the position of the metre rule on the pivot so that the metre rule is as near as possible to being balanced. 

 (i) Write down the reading on the metre rule at the position of the pivot. 

 The pivot is at the .................... cm mark of the metre rule. 

 (ii) Record the distance x from the 90.0 cm mark to the pivot. 

 x = ...........................................................[1] 

 (iii) Record the distance y from the pivot to the 50.0 cm mark. 

 y = ...........................................................[1] 

 (iv) Determine the weight W of the metre rule using the equation W = Px y 

 , where P = 2.0 N. P is the weight of load P. 

## W = ...........................................................[1] 

 (b) Keep the pivot at the same position, as recorded in (a)(i). 

 Move load P to the 95.0 cm mark. Place the load Q on the metre rule and adjust its position so that the rule balances. 

 (i) On Fig. 1.2 mark, with a letter X, the approximate position of Q. [1] 

## P 

 a 

 bench 

 pivot 

 50.0 cm mark 

 9 5.0 cm mark 

 Fig. 1.2 


© UCLES 2015 0625/51/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

 (ii) Record the distance a from the 95.0 cm mark to the pivot. 

 a = ............................................................... 

 (iii) Record the distance b from Q to the pivot. 

 b = ............................................................... 

 (iv) Record the distance c from the 50.0 cm mark to the pivot. 

 c = ............................................................... [1] 

 (v) Calculate the product aP , where P = 2.0 N. Include the unit. 

 aP = ............................................................... 

 (vi) Calculate the product bQ , where Q = 1.0 N. Q is the weight of load Q. 

 bQ = ............................................................... 

 (vii) Calculate the product cW , using the value of W determined in part (a)(iv). 

 cW = ............................................................... [2] (c) A student suggests that aP should be equal to bQ + cW. 

 State whether your results support the suggestion. Justify your answer by reference to the results. 

 statement .................................................................................................................................. 

 justification ................................................................................................................................ 

 ................................................................................................................................................... [2] 

 (d) Suggest one practical reason why it is difficult to obtain exact results with this experiment. 

 ................................................................................................................................................... 

 ...............................................................................................................................................[1] 

 [Total: 10] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/51/M/J/15 

**2** In this experiment, you will investigate the cooling of water. 

 Carry out the following instructions referring to Fig. 2.1. You are provided with a beaker containing hot water and a thermometer. 

 thermometer 

 water 

 Fig. 2.1 

 (a) (i) Place the thermometer in the beaker of water. When the thermometer reading stops rising, measure the temperature θ of the water and immediately start the stopclock. Record θ in Table 2.1 at time t = 0 s. 

 (ii) In Table 2.1, record the temperature of the water at 30 s intervals until you have a total of six values up to time t = 150 s. 

 Table 2.1 

 t / s θ / °C 

 0 

 30 

 60 

 90 

 120 

 150 [3] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/51/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

 (b) Plot a graph of θ / °C ( y -axis) against t / s ( x -axis). 

## [5] 

 (c) (i) State whether the rate of cooling of the water in the beaker increases, decreases or stays approximately constant during the period of cooling. 

 The rate of cooling of the water .....................................................................................[1] 

 (ii) Justify your statement by reference to the graph. 

 ........................................................................................................................................... 

 ........................................................................................................................................... 

 .......................................................................................................................................[1] 

 [Total: 10] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/51/M/J/15 

**3** In this experiment, you will investigate the resistance of lamp filaments in series and parallel circuits. 

 The circuit shown in Fig. 3.1 has been set up for you. 

 power supply 

## A 

## V 

 Fig. 3.1 

 (a) (i) Switch on. Measure and record the potential difference V S across the lamps and the current I S in the circuit. Switch off. 

 V S = ............................................................... 

 I S = ............................................................... [2] 

 (ii) Calculate the resistance R S of the lamp filaments using the equation R S = 

## V S 

## I S 

## . 

## R S = ...........................................................[1] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/51/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

 (b) The circuit is to be rearranged so that 

- the lamps are in parallel 

- the ammeter will measure the total current in the circuit 

- the voltmeter will measure the potential difference across the lamps. 

 Draw a diagram of this circuit using standard circuit symbols. 

## [2] 

 (c) Rearrange the circuit as described in (b). 

 (i) Switch on. Measure and record the potential difference V P across the lamps and the current I P in the circuit. Switch off. 

 V P = ............................................................... 

 I P = ............................................................... [1] 

 (ii) Calculate the resistance R P of the lamp filaments using the equation R P = 

## V P 

## I P 

## . 

## R P = ............................................................... 

 (iii) Calculate the ratio 

## R S 

## R P 

## . 

## R S 

## R P 

## = ............................................................... 

## [2] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/51/M/J/15 

 (d) A student wishes to investigate whether the ratio 

## R S 

## R P 

 for the two lamps is the same under all conditions. 

 (i) Suggest a variable that you could change in order to obtain further sets of readings. You are not asked to take any further readings. 

 ........................................................................................................................................... 

 (ii) Explain briefly how you would change this variable. 

 ........................................................................................................................................... 

 ........................................................................................................................................... [2] 

 [Total: 10] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/51/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

## BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2015 0625/51/M/J/15 

**4** In this experiment, you will investigate the refraction of light passing through a transparent block. 

 Carry out the following instructions, referring to Fig. 4.1. 

## G H 

## B 

## L 

## N 

## F J 

## A E 

## D M C 

 eye 

 ray-trace sheet 

 hole 

 Fig. 4.1 

 (a) Place the transparent block, largest face down, on the ray-trace sheet supplied. The block should be approximately in the middle of the paper. Draw the outline of the block ABCD. 

 (b) Remove the block and draw a normal NL at the centre of side AB. Label the point E where the normal crosses AB. Label the point M where the normal crosses CD. 

 (c) Draw a line GH , parallel to AB and 6.0 cm above AB. Label the point J where the normal crosses GH. 

 (d) Draw a line, starting at E , to the left of the normal and at an angle of incidence i = 30° to the normal as shown in Fig. 4.1. Label the point F where the line meets GH. 


© UCLES 2015 0625/51/M/J/15 

 (e) Place two pins P 1 and P 2 on the line FE , placing one pin close to E. Label the positions of P 1 and P 2. 

 (f) Replace the block and observe the images of P 1 and P 2 through side CD of the block so that the images of P 1 and P 2 appear one behind the other. Place two pins P 3 and P 4 between your eye and the block so that P 3 and P 4 , and the images of P 1 and P 2 seen through the block, appear one behind the other. Label the positions of P 3 and P 4. Remove the block. 

 (g) Draw a line joining the positions of P 3 and P 4. Continue the line until it meets CD and label this point K. Draw the line KE. 

 (h) (i) Measure and record the length a between points F and J. 

 a = ............................................................... 

 (ii) Measure and record the length b between points F and E. 

 b = ............................................................... 

 (iii) Measure and record the length c between points E and K. 

 c = ............................................................... 

 (iv) Measure and record the length d between points M and K. 

 d = ............................................................... [2] 

 (i) Calculate n , the refractive index of the material of the block, using the equation n = 

 ac bd. 

 n = .......................................................... [1] 

 (j) Repeat steps (d) – (h) but with the angle of incidence i = 50°. 

 a = ............................................................... 

 b = ............................................................... 

 c = ............................................................... 

 d = ............................................................... 

 n = ............................................................... [2] 

 (k) Suggest one precaution that you should take with this experiment to obtain reliable results. 

 ................................................................................................................................................... 

 ................................................................................................................................................... 

 ...............................................................................................................................................[1] 

 Tie your ray-trace sheet into this Booklet between pages 10 and 11. [4] 

 [Total: 10] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/51/M/J/15 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

## BLANK PAGE 


