® IGCSE is the registered trademark of Cambridge International Examinations. 

### CAMBRIDGE INTERNATIONAL EXAMINATIONS 

Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## MARK SCHEME for the May/June 2015 series 

# 0625 PHYSICS 

## 0625/31 Paper 3 (Extended Theory), maximum raw mark 80 

This mark scheme is published as an aid to teachers and candidates, to indicate the requirements of the examination. It shows the basis on which Examiners were instructed to award marks. It does not indicate the details of the discussions that took place at an Examiners’ meeting before marking began, which would have considered the acceptability of alternative answers. 

Mark schemes should be read in conjunction with the question paper and the Principal Examiner Report for Teachers. 

Cambridge will not enter into discussions about these mark schemes. 

Cambridge is publishing the mark schemes for the May/June 2015 series for most Cambridge IGCSE®, Cambridge International A and AS Level components and some Cambridge O Level components. 


 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2015 0625 31 

 NOTES ABOUT MARK SCHEME SYMBOLS & OTHER MATTERS 

B marks are independent marks, which do not depend on other marks. For a B mark to be scored, the point to which it refers must be seen specifically in the candidate’s answer. 

M marks are method marks upon which accuracy marks (A marks) later depend. For an M mark to be scored, the point to which it refers must be seen in a candidate's answer. If a candidate fails to score a particular M mark, then none of the dependent A marks can be scored. 

C marks are compensatory marks which can be scored even if the points to which they refer are not written down by the candidate, provided subsequent working gives evidence that they must have known it. For example, if an equation carries a C mark and the candidate does not write down the actual equation but does correct working which shows he knew the equation, then the C mark is scored. 

A marks are accuracy or answer marks which either depend on an M mark, or which are one of the ways which allow a C mark to be scored. 

Brackets ( ) around words or units in the mark scheme are intended to indicate wording used to clarify the mark scheme, but the marks do not depend on seeing the words or units in brackets, e.g. 10 (J) means that the mark is scored for 10, regardless of the unit given. 

c.a.o. means “correct answer only”. 

e.c.f. means “error carried forward”. This indicates that if a candidate has made an earlier mistake and has carried his incorrect value forward to subsequent stages of working, he may be given marks indicated by e.c.f. provided his subsequent working is correct, bearing in mind his earlier mistake. This prevents a candidate being penalised more than once for a particular mistake, but only applies to marks annotated “e.c.f.” 

e.e.o.o. means “each error or omission”. 

owtte means “or words to that effect”. 

Underlining indicates that this must be seen in the answer offered, or something very similar. 

OR / or indicates alternative answers, any one of which is satisfactory for scoring the mark. 

AND indicates that both answers are required to score the mark. 

Spelling Be generous with spelling and use of English. However, do not allow ambiguities, e.g. spelling which suggests confusion between reflection / refraction / diffraction or thermistor / transistor/ transformer. 

Sig. figs. On this paper, answers are generally acceptable to any number of significant figures [=2, except where the mark scheme specifies otherwise or gives an answer to only 1 significant figure. 

Units Deduct one mark for each incorrect or missing unit from an answer that would otherwise gain all the marks available for that answer: maximum 1 per question. 

Fractions Fractions are only acceptable where specified. 


 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2015 0625 31 

Extras If a candidate gives more answers than required, irrelevant extras are ignored; for extras which contradict an otherwise correct response, or are forbidden by the mark scheme, use right plus wrong = 0. 

Ignore indicates that something which is not correct is disregarded and does not cause a right plus wrong penalty. 

NOT indicates that an incorrect answer is not to be disregarded, but cancels another otherwise correct alternative offered by the candidate, i.e. right plus wrong penalty applies. 


 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2015 0625 31 

1 (a) (i) acceleration OR increasing speed C1 

 constant acceleration OR constant rate of increase in speed A1 

 (ii) decreasing acceleration OR decreasing rate of increase in speed NOT deceleration B1 

 (b) mention of air resistance AND weight (of object) / force due to gravity B1 

 acceleration at start (of fall) is acceleration of gravity / 10 m / s^2 / a maximum / g OR acceleration decreases (as it falls) B1 

 air resistance increases as speed increases/as it accelerates B1 

 acceleration zero/terminal velocity/constant speed/maximum speed when air resistance = weight B1 

 [Total: 7] 

2 (a) (i) (P =) F÷A OR 3.5 × 104 ÷ 0.25 C1 = 1.4 × 105 Pa ecf (i) A1 

 (ii) (1.4 × 105 – 1.0 × 105 =) 4(.0) × 104 Pa ecf (ii) B1 

 (iii) P = h ρ g in any form OR (h =) P÷ρ g OR 4.0 × 104 ÷ (1020 × 10) C1 = 3.9 m OR 4 m A1 

 (b) any 2 from: max. B2 

- weight of block 

- upward force of water (on block) / upthrust (of water on block) 

- weight of cable 

 (c) (tension force) becomes smaller or zero B1 

 [Total: 8] 

3 (a) W = m g in any form OR (m =) W ÷ g OR 80 000 ÷ 10 C1 8000 kg A1 

 (b) ρ = m ÷ V in any form OR (V =) m ÷ ρ OR 8000 ÷ 1000 C1 = 8.0 m^3 ecf (a) A1 

 (c) m g h OR weight × h OR 8000 × 10 × 4 C1 = 320 000 J OR 320 kJ ecf (a) A1 


 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2015 0625 31 

 (d) (efficiency = ) output (energy) ÷ input (energy) (× 100) OR 96 ÷ 320 (× 100) C1 

 = 0.30 OR 30% ecf (c) A1 

 [Total: 8] 

4 (a) (i) any 2 from: max. B2 

- liquid molecules not in fixed positions / can move about / move past     each other OR solid molecules have a fixed position 

- liquid molecules have random arrangement OR solid molecules     arranged regularly / in patterns / layers / lattice 

- liquid molecules are (slightly) further apart (than solid molecules) OR     reverse argument 

 (ii) energy / work / thermal energy / (latent) heat required AND to break bonds (between molecules) / to overcome attractive forces (between the molecules) / to increase the potential energy of the molecules B1 

 (b) (i) E = ml in any form OR ml OR 1.65 × 330 000 C1 = 540 000 J OR 544 500 J A1 

 (ii) chemical (energy in body) converted to thermal / internal (energy) B1 

 [Total: 6] 

5 (a) energy/heat required to increase temperature 

- of 1 kg / 1 g / unit mass (of the substance) B1 

- by 1 °C / 1 K / unit temperature B1 

 (b) E = m c ∆θ in any form OR (c =) E ÷ m ∆θ C1 E = P t in any form OR 420 × 95 (= 39 900) C1 ∆θ = [40.5 – 19.5] OR 21 C1 (c = 39 900÷42 =) 950 J/ (kg °C) A1 

 (c) any two separate points from: max. B2 

- lagging / insulation (around block) OR insulate (the block) 

- raise temperature of block by a smaller amount OR heat for a shorter time     OR use lower power heater for same time OR higher power for same     temperature rise / shorter time 

- polish the surface of the block OR wrap the block in shiny material OR paint     (shiny) white 

- reduce initial temperature of block (to below room temperature) OR raise     temperature of room 

- reduce draughts 

 [Total: 8] 


 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2015 0625 31 

6 (a) (i) any value between 6 and 7 mm seen C1 

 26 ± 2 mm OR 2.6 ± 0.2 cm A1 

 (ii) v = f λ in any form OR (f =) v ÷ λ OR 0.39 ÷ 0.026 C1 = 15 Hz ecf (i) A1 

 (b) at least 4 wavefronts showing refraction in correct direction B1 7 parallel wavefront lines continuous with those in fast region B1 

 (c) unchanged / nothing B1 

 [Total: 7] 

7 (a) (i) all three of: max. B2 

- virtual, 

- upright / erect / same way up, 

- magnified / large(r) (than object) award 1 mark for one or two correct description(s) which are not contradicted 

 (ii) RS B1 

 (iii) eye placed to right of lens B1 

 (b) any two correct rays from: max. B2 

- ray parallel to axis refracted through F 

- ray passing through centre of lens undeflected 

- ray through added focus to left of lens refracted parallel to axis 

 image from intersection of rays clearly shown as inverted B1 

 3 correct rays drawn on Fig. 7.2, from tip of O to intersection of other two rays and refracted correctly at lens note: the third ray does not have to be one of those listed above B1 

 [Total: 8] 

8 (a) (i) (magnetic) field (lines) of magnet cut by turns / coil / wire OR (magnetic) field linked with coil changes B1 

 (ii) 1 (needle of meter) deflects to the left (and returns to zero) B1 

 2 (needle of meter) deflects to right and left (alternately) B1 OR to and fro 


 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2015 0625 31 

 (b) (i) Np/Ns = Vp/Vs in any form OR (Ns =) NpVs/Vp OR 8000 × 6/240 C1 OR (Vp/Vs =) 40 (NS =) 200 A1 

 (ii) 1 (P = IV = 0.050 × 240 =) 12 W B1 

 2 0.9 × 12 OR 10.8 OR IsVs = 0.9 IpVp OR Is = 0.9 IpVp /Vs C1 OR 0.9 × 0.05 × 240/6 (Is =) 1.8 A ecf 1. A1 

 [Total: 8] 

9 (a) (i) 1/R = 1/R 1 + 1/R 2 OR R = R 1 R 2 /(R 1 + R 2 ) OR with numbers C1 (R =) 500 Ω A1 

 (ii) I = (12 ÷ 1000) = 0.012 A ecf (i) B1 

 (iii) (V =) IR OR 0.012 × 500 OR 12 × 500 ÷ 1000 C1 = 6.0 V ecf (i)(ii) A1 

 (b) (more current in circuit so) current (in 500 Ω resistor) increases B1 

 resistance of parallel combination decreases OR total resistance (of circuit) decreases B1 

 [Total: 7] 

10 (a) (i) at least three horizontal, parallel lines evenly spaced (ignore edge effects) B1 

 arrows pointing left to right B1 

 (b) right hand half of ball has more + signs than – signs AND left hand half of ball has more – signs than + signs M1 

 equal numbers of + and – signs A1 

 (c) Q = I t in any form OR (I =) Q ÷ t OR 2.8 × 10 –8^ ÷ 0.05 C1 5.6 × 10 –7^ A OR C/s A1 

 [Total: 6] 

11 (a) electromagnetic (waves / radiation / rays / spectrum) B1 OR (high energy) photons 


 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2015 0625 31 

(b) α and β deflected in opposite directions B1 

 any 1 from: B1 

- β deflected more (than α) 

- deflections perpendicular to field direction and to paths of particle 

- paths (of particles) are curves / circular / arcs 

(c) curved path B1 

 (deflected/attracted) towards positively charged plate B1 OR in opposite direction to field 

(d) (i) α-particle OR helium nucleus OR 2 protons + 2 neutrons B1 

 (ii) A = 210 Z = 84 B1 

 [Total: 7] 


