 This document consists of 10 printed pages and 2 blank pages. 

 DC (CW/JG) 91127/2 © UCLES 2015 [Turn over 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

* 3 9 0 8 6 5 5 9 4 8 * 

 PHYSICS 0625/52 Paper 5 Practical Test May/June 2015 1 hour 15 minutes Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: As listed in the Confidential Instructions. 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name in the spaces at the top of the page. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all questions. Electronic calculators may be used. You may lose marks if you do not show your working or if you do not use appropriate units. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. 

 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 For Examiner’s Use 

 1 

 2 

 3 

 4 

 Total 


© UCLES 2015 0625/52/M/J/15 

**1** In this experiment, you will investigate a pendulum. 

 Carry out the following instructions referring to Figs. 1.1 and 1.2. 

 l 

 bob 

 one complete oscillation 

 clamp clamp 

 Fig. 1.1 Fig. 1.2 

 A pendulum has been set up for you. 

 (a) Adjust the pendulum until its length l = 50.0 cm. The length l is measured to the centre of the bob. 

 State one precaution that you took to measure the length l as accurately as possible. You may draw a diagram. 

## ................................................................................................................................................... 

## ...............................................................................................................................................[1] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/52/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

 (b) (i) Displace the pendulum bob slightly and release it so that it swings. Measure the time t for 20 complete oscillations of the pendulum (see Fig. 1.2). 

 t = .......................................................... [1] 

 (ii) Calculate the period T of the pendulum. The period is the time for one complete oscillation. 

 T = ...........................................................[1] 

 (iii) Explain why measuring the time for 20 oscillations, rather than for 1 oscillation, gives a more accurate value for T. 

 ........................................................................................................................................... 

 .......................................................................................................................................[1] 

 (c) Adjust the length of the pendulum until its length l = 100.0 cm. Repeat steps (b)(i) and (b)(ii). 

 t = ............................................................... 

 T = ............................................................... [2] 

 (d) A student suggests that doubling the length l of the pendulum should double the period T. 

 State whether your results support this suggestion. Justify your answer by reference to the results. 

 statement .................................................................................................................................. 

 justification ................................................................................................................................ 

 ................................................................................................................................................... [2] 

 (e) To continue the investigation of the relationship between the length l of the pendulum and the period T , it is necessary to use a range of values of length l. 

 List additional l values that you would plan to use in the laboratory. You are not asked to make any more measurements. 

 ...............................................................................................................................................[2] 

 [Total: 10] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/52/M/J/15 

**2** In this experiment, you will investigate the cooling of water. 

 Carry out the following instructions referring to Fig. 2.1. 

 thermometer 

 water 

 beaker A 

 Fig. 2.1 

 (a) Pour 100 cm^3 of hot water into beaker A. Place the thermometer in beaker A , as shown in Fig. 2.1. 

 (i) Record the temperature θH of the hot water in beaker A. 

 θH = ...........................................................[1] 

 (ii) State one precaution that you took to ensure that the temperature reading for the hot water is as reliable as possible. 

 ........................................................................................................................................... 

 .......................................................................................................................................[1] 

 (b) (i) Add 50 cm^3 of cold water to the hot water in beaker A. Stir briefly. Record the temperature θ 1. 

 θ 1 = ............................................................... 

 (ii) Calculate the decrease in temperature θA using the equation θA = ( θH – θ 1 ). 

 θA = ............................................................... [2] 

 (c) (i) Add a further 100 cm 3 of cold water to the water in beaker A. Stir briefly. Record the temperature θ 2. 

 θ 2 = ............................................................... 

 (ii) Calculate the decrease in temperature θB using the equation θB = ( θ 1 – θ 2 ). 

 θB = ............................................................... [2] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/52/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

 (d) Suggest two factors, other than the volume and temperature of the cold water added, that affect the decrease in temperature of the hot water. 

1. ............................................................................................................................................... 

 ................................................................................................................................................... 

2. ............................................................................................................................................... 

 ................................................................................................................................................... [2] 

 (e) Describe briefly how a measuring cylinder is read to obtain an accurate value for the volume of water. You may draw a diagram. 

## ................................................................................................................................................... 

## ................................................................................................................................................... 

## ................................................................................................................................................... 

## ...............................................................................................................................................[2] 

 [Total: 10] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/52/M/J/15 

**3** In this experiment, you will investigate the resistance of lamps. 

 The circuit shown in Fig. 3.1 has been set up for you. 

 power supply 

## V A 

 Fig. 3.1 

 (a) (i) Switch on. Measure and record the potential difference V P across the lamps and the current IP in the circuit. Switch off. 

 V P = ............................................................... 

 IP = ............................................................... [2] 

 (ii) Calculate the combined resistance R P of the lamps using the equation R P = 

## V P 

## IP 

## . 

## R P = ...........................................................[1] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/52/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

 (b) Disconnect and remove one of the lamps. 

 The remaining components are to be arranged to make a circuit in which 

- the two lamps are in series 

- the ammeter will measure the total current in the circuit 

- the voltmeter will measure the potential difference across both lamps. 

 In the space below, draw a diagram of this circuit using standard circuit symbols. 

## [2] 

 (c) Set up the circuit as described in (b). 

 (i) Switch on. Measure and record the potential difference V S across the two lamps and the current IS in the circuit. Switch off. 

 V S = ............................................................... 

 IS = ............................................................... [1] 

 (ii) Calculate the resistance R S of the lamps using the equation R S = 

## V S 

## IS 

## . 

## R S = ...........................................................[2] 

 (d) (i) A student wishes to vary the current in the circuit in Fig. 3.1, using a variable resistor. 

 In the space below, draw the standard circuit symbol for a variable resistor. 

## [1] 

 (ii) On Fig. 3.1, label with X a suitable position in the circuit for a variable resistor used to vary the current in all the lamps. [1] 

 [Total: 10] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/52/M/J/15 

**4** In this experiment, you will investigate reflection using a plane mirror. 

 Carry out the following instructions, referring to Fig. 4.1. 

## M R 

## L 

## N 

## B 

## A 

 eye 

## 30° 

 ray-trace sheet 

 e 

 hole 

 Fig. 4.1 

 (a) Draw a line 10 cm long near the middle of the blank ray-trace sheet supplied. Label the line MR. Draw a normal to this line that passes through its centre. Label the normal NL. Label the point at which NL crosses MR with the letter A. 

 (b) Draw a line 8 cm long from A at an angle of incidence i = 30° to the normal, below MR and to the left of the normal. Label the end of this line B. 

 (c) Place the reflecting face of the mirror vertically on the line MR. 


© UCLES 2015 0625/52/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

 (d) Place two pins P 1 and P 2 on line AB a suitable distance apart. 

 (e) View the images of pins P 1 and P 2 from the direction indicated by the eye in Fig. 4.1. Place two pins P 3 and P 4 , some distance apart, so that pins P 3 and P 4 , and the images of P 1 and P 2 , all appear exactly one behind the other. Label the positions of P 3 and P 4. 

 (f) Remove pins P 3 and P 4 and the mirror. Draw the line joining the positions of P 3 and P 4. Extend the line until it meets NL. 

 (g) Measure, and record in Table 4.1, the angle α between NL and the line joining the positions of P 3 and P 4. At this stage the angle θ between the mirror and line MR is 0 °, as shown in the table. 

 (h) Remove pins P 1 and P 2. Draw lines at angles θ = 10 °, 20 ° and 30 ° to MR , one of which is shown in Fig. 4.1. Repeat steps (d) to (g) , placing the mirror on each of the new lines in turn, so that you obtain four sets of readings. 

 Table 4.1 

 θ / ° α / ° 

 0 

 10 

 20 

 30 [1] 

 (i) Plot a graph of α / ° ( y -axis) against θ / ° ( x -axis). 

## [4] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/52/M/J/15 

 (j) State whether your graph line shows that the angle α is directly proportional to the angle θ. Justify your statement by reference to your graph line. 

 statement .................................................................................................................................. 

 justification ................................................................................................................................ 

 ................................................................................................................................................... [2] 

 Tie your ray-trace sheet into this Booklet between pages 10 and 11. [3] 

 [Total: 10] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/52/M/J/15 

## BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2015 0625/52/M/J/15 

## BLANK PAGE 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 


