 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 18 printed pages and 2 blank pages. IB15 06_0625_14/2RP© UCLES 2015 [Turn over 

# *3647450832* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## PHYSICS 0625/14 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice May/June 2015 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer SheetSoft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB recommended) READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil.Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces providedunless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. There areanswers A forty, B, C questions on this paper. Answer and D. all questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer.Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2015 0625/14/M/J/15 

1 The diagram shows a measuring instrument. 

 Which quantity is this instrument used to measure? A area B density C mass D volume 

2 The diagram shows the distance-time graph of an object. 

(^00) distance time Which statement describes the object? A It is accelerating. B It is moving at a constant speed. C It is slowing down. D It is stationary. 


© UCLES 2015 0625/14/M/J/15 [Turn over 

3 A tennis player hits a ball hard and 0.40 s later hears the echo from a wall. 

 The speed of sound in air is 330 m / s. How far away is the player from the wall? A 66 m B 132 m C 264 m D 825 m 

4 Weight is an example of which quantity? A acceleration B force C mass D pressure 

5 Which substance in the table has the lowest density? 

 substance mass / g volume / cm^3 A nylon 1.2 1.0 B cotton 1.5 1.0 C olive oil 1.8 2.0 D water 2.0 2.0 


© UCLES 2015 0625/14/M/J/15 

6 A car travels along a horizontal road at a constant speed. Three horizontal forces act on the car.The diagram shows two of these three forces. 

 air resistance 300 N 

 force from engine 1500 N 

 direction of motion forwards 

 What is the size and the direction of the third horizontal force acting on the car? A 1200 N backwards B 1200 N forwards C 1800 N backwards D 1800 N forwards 

7 The extension-load graph for a spring is shown. The unstretched length of the spring is 17.0 cm. 

 3 

## 2 

## 1 

## 0 

## 0 1 2 3 4 

 load / N 

 extension / cm 

 When an object is hung from the spring, the length of the spring is 19.2 cm. What is the weight of the object? A 1.4 N B 1.6 N C 2.6 N D 3.0 N 


© UCLES 2015 0625/14/M/J/15 [Turn over 

8 Which form of energy is used to generate electrical energy in a tidal power station? A chemical energy B gravitational energy C internal energy (thermal energy) D nuclear energy 

9 Four different model steam engines each lift a 1.0 kg object from the same laboratory floor to the same laboratory bench. Each engine takes a different time to lift the object. How does the most powerful engine compare with the other engines? speed of lifting object onto bench useful work done A faster more than other engines B faster same as other engines C slower less than other engines D slower same as other engines 

10 Which statement is explained by reference to pressure? A Objects with greater mass have greater weight. B One kilogram of water occupies more volume than one kilogram of lead. C Spikes on running-shoes sink into the ground. D Water cooled to a low enough temperature turns to ice. 

11 Small smoke particles suspended in air are viewed through a microscope. The smoke particles move randomly. What does this show? A The air consists of fast-moving molecules. B The pressure of the air is increasing. C There are convection currents in the air. D The temperature of the air is increasing. 


© UCLES 2015 0625/14/M/J/15 

12 The gas in a container is heated but is kept at constant volume. Why does the gas pressure increase? A The molecules expand. B The molecules increase in mass. C The molecules move further apart. D The molecules move more rapidly. 

13 Which row is correct for the evaporation of a liquid? 

 the particles escapingfrom the liquid are on average 

 the average kineticenergy of particles remaining in the liquid A the least energetic decreases B the least energetic increases C the most energetic decreases D the most energetic increases 

14 A long thin bar of copper is heated evenly along its length. copper bar 

 heat What happens to the bar? A It becomes less heavy. B It becomes longer. C It becomes shorter. D It bends at the ends. 


© UCLES 2015 0625/14/M/J/15 [Turn over 

15 A solid is heated from room temperature. The graph shows how its temperature changes withtime as it is heated constantly. 

 time 

 temperature 

## 0 

## 0 

room temperature (^) P 

## Q 

## R 

## S T 

 Between which labelled points on the graph is the substance partly solid and partly liquid? A between P and Q B between Q and R C between R and S D between S and T 

16 One method of heat transfer involves the energy travelling at a much greater speed than in other methods. What is the name of this method? A conduction B convection C evaporation D radiation 


© UCLES 2015 0625/14/M/J/15 

17 The diagram shows four markings on a liquid-in-glass thermometer. 

## –10^0 °°CC 

## 100110 °°CC 

 Which temperatures are the upper and lower fixed points? upper fixed point / °C 

 lower fixed point / °C A 110 0 B 110 –10 C 100 0 D 100 –10 

18 The diagram shows a block of ice placed in a warm room. At which point is the temperature the lowest? 

 table 

clamp (^) ice 

## B 

## C 

## D 

## A 


© UCLES 2015 0625/14/M/J/15 [Turn over 

19 The thermal capacity of solid Y is greater than that of solid Z. What is a consequence of this? A Solid Y needs less thermal energy to melt it than solid Z. B Solid Y needs less thermal energy to raise its temperature by 1 °C than solid Z. C Solid Y needs more thermal energy to melt it than solid Z. D Solid Y needs more thermal energy to raise its temperature by 1 °C than solid Z. 

20 The diagram shows a water wave in a ripple tank. Which line represents a wavefront? 

## C 

## A D 

## B 


© UCLES 2015 0625/14/M/J/15 

21 Which diagram shows how the light from a candle is reflected by a mirror, and shows the positionof the image formed? 

 eye 

 image ofcandle candle 

## A 

 eye 

 candle 

 eye 

 image ofcandle candle 

## B 

 image of candle 

## C D 

 eye 

 candle 

 image of candle 

 mirror 

 mirror 

 mirror 

 mirror 


© UCLES 2015 0625/14/M/J/15 [Turn over 

22 The diagram shows a ray of white light incident on a triangular glass prism. 

 ray of white light 

 glass prism 

 The ray enters the prism. Which row correctly states if the light is refracted, and if the light is dispersed? refracted dispersed A no no B no yes C yes no D yes yes 

23 A parallel beam of light falls on a converging lens. Which diagram shows what happens to the beam of light? **A B C D** 


© UCLES 2015 0625/14/M/J/15 

24 In the experiment shown, the bell is heard ringing. The air is gradually pumped out of the jar. Nochange is made to the ringing bell. 

 air pump 

 rubber bands bell 

 glass jar 

 After a few minutes the bell can no longer be heard. Why is this? A The amplitude of vibration of the bell decreases. B The frequency of vibration of the bell increases. C The sound waves from the bell become transverse. D The sound waves need a medium to travel through. 

25 What can be heard by the human ear? A a whistle emitting a wave of frequency 50 kHz B a bat emitting a wave of frequency 30 kHz C an insect emitting a wave of frequency 300 Hz D a vibrating spring emitting a wave of frequency 5 Hz 

26 Which action will demagnetise a magnetised piece of steel? A Cool it in a freezer for several hours. B Hit it repeatedly with a hammer. C Put it in a coil carrying a direct current (d.c.). D Put it near an unmagnetised piece of iron. 


© UCLES 2015 0625/14/M/J/15 [Turn over 

27 Which row gives the unit for electromotive force (e.m.f.) and the unit for potential difference(p.d.)? 

 electromotiveforce differencepotential A newton joule B newton volt C volt joule D volt volt 

28 A student investigates the force on a bar magnet placed near a current-carrying coil. She carriesout three different experiments. 

 N S magnet attracted to coil experiment 1 

## N S 

 experiment 2 

## S N 

 experiment 3 In experiment 1, the magnet is attracted to the coil. Which row shows what happens in the other two experiments? experiment 2 experiment 3 A magnet attracted magnet attracted B magnet attracted magnet repelled C magnet repelled magnet attracted D magnet repelled magnet repelled 

29 Which sample of copper wire has the greatest electrical resistance? 

 length of wire / m diameter of wire / mm A 1.0 2.0 B 1.0 4.0 C 10 2.0 D 10 4.0 


© UCLES 2015 0625/14/M/J/15 

30 A student uses the circuit shown to determine the resistance of the two identical resistors. 

## A 

## V 

 The voltmeter reading is 2.2 V and the ammeter reading is 0.25 A. What is the resistance of each resistor? A 0.275 Ω B 0.55 Ω C 4.4 Ω D 8.8 Ω 

31 Which component is represented by this circuit symbol? 

 A a bell B a fuse C a relay D a transformer 

32 A student sets up this circuit. 

 What is the purpose of the circuit? A to allow a lamp to be made dimmer or brighter as required B to amplify the sound of a voice C to light a lamp in the dark D to sound a bell when the temperature rises 


© UCLES 2015 0625/14/M/J/15 [Turn over 

33 Three cores of different metals, P, Q and R, are placed inside identical coils of wire. At least one of the metals is non-ferrous. The cores are held above some iron nails. The three diagrams below show what happens when there is a current in the coils. 

## P 

 coil 

 core iron nails 

## Q R 

## + 

## – 

## + 

## – 

## + 

## – 

 The three diagrams below show what happens when the current is then switched off. 

## P Q R 

## + 

## – 

## + 

## – 

## + 

## – 

 Which row identifies whether the core metals are ferrous or non-ferrous? ferrous non-ferrous A P Q and R B P and Q R C Q and R P D R P and Q 


© UCLES 2015 0625/14/M/J/15 

34 Which diagram represents the voltage output of a simple a.c. generator? 

## 0 

 voltage 

 time 

## A 

## 0 

 voltage 

 time 

## B 

## 0 

 voltage 

 time 

## C 

## 0 

 voltage 

 time 

## D 

35 In an electrical circuit, what is the purpose of a fuse? A to connect the metal case of an appliance to the earth B to cut off the electrical supply if the current is too large C to keep an electrical appliance dry in damp conditions D to maintain a steady voltage as the current varies 


© UCLES 2015 0625/14/M/J/15 [Turn over 

36 The diagram shows a cathode-ray tube. 

 cathode anode 

 cathode-rays 

 Which electrode should be heated, and which electrode should be positive? heated electrode positive electrode A anode anode B anode cathode C cathode anode D cathode cathode 

37 Which particles are emitted during thermionic emission? A atoms B electrons C neutrons D protons 

38 A uranium 23892 Unucleus emits an α-particle. 

 What are the new nucleon and proton numbers? nucleon number proton number A 238 88 B 236 90 C 234 92 D 234 90 


© UCLES 2015 0625/14/M/J/15 

39 Which row shows the nature and the penetrating ability of β-particles? 

 nature most are stopped by A electron a few mm of aluminium B electron a thin sheet of paper C helium nucleus a few mm of aluminium D helium nucleus a thin sheet of paper 

40 A radioactive isotope is placed near a detector. The readings on the detector are corrected forbackground radiation and recorded every hour. 

 The table shows the corrected readings. time / hours 0 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 count rate / counts per second 500 375 280 210 160 What is the half-life of the isotope? A between 0 and 1 hour B between 1 hour and 2 hours C between 2 hours and 3 hours D between 3 hours and 4 hours 


© UCLES 2015 0625/14/M/J/15 

## BLANK PAGE 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeInternational Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge LocalExaminations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2015 0625/14/M/J/15 

## BLANK PAGE 


