 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 18 printed pages and 2 blank pages. 

 IB15 06_0625_13/2RP © UCLES 2015 [Turn over 

# *0951356906* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## PHYSICS 0625/13 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice May/June 2015 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A, B, C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2015 0625/13/M/J/15 

1 A cook wants to prepare some food to be cooked by 1.15 p.m. He uses an oven with an automatic timer that can be set to switch on and off at certain times. The oven needs to be switched on for 2 hours 10 minutes. 

 At which time does the oven need to switch on? 

 A 11.05 a.m. B 11.25 a.m. C 3.05 p.m. D 3.25 p.m. 

2 The speed-time graph shows the motion of a car. 

## 0 

## 0 

 speed 

 time 

## P 

## Q R 

 Which row describes the motion? 

 between P and Q between Q and R 

 A accelerating moving at constant speed 

 B accelerating not moving 

 C moving at constant speed decelerating 

 D moving at constant speed not moving 

3 A car travels 100 km. The journey takes two hours. The highest speed of the car is 80 km / h, and the lowest speed is 40 km / h. 

 What is the average speed for the journey? 

 A 40 km / h B 50 km / h C 60 km / h D 120 km / h 

4 Weight is an example of which quantity? 

 A acceleration 

 B force 

 C mass 

 D pressure 


© UCLES 2015 0625/13/M/J/15 [Turn over 

5 A metal block has the dimensions shown. Its mass is 1000 g. 

 2 cm 

 10 cm 

 5 cm 

 What is the density of the metal? 

A (^)  

#  

#  

#  

#  

#  

# × 

# × 

# 1000 2 

(^5 10) g / cm 3 B (^)  

#  

#  

#  

#  

 (^) × × 

# 1000 

(^2 510) g / cm 3 C (^)  

#  

#  

#  

#  

#  

# × 

# × 

# 5 10 

(^1000 2) g / cm 3 D (^)  

#  

#  

#  

#  

#  

# 2 × 5 × 10 

(^1000) g / cm 3 6 A car travels along a horizontal road at a constant speed. Three horizontal forces act on the car. The diagram shows two of these three forces. air resistance 300 N force from engine 1500 N direction of motion forwards What is the size and the direction of the third horizontal force acting on the car? A 1200 N backwards B 1200 N forwards C 1800 N backwards D 1800 N forwards 


© UCLES 2015 0625/13/M/J/15 

7 The extension-load graph for a spring is shown. The unstretched length of the spring is 17.0 cm. 

## 3 

## 2 

## 1 

## 0 

## 0 1 2 3 4 

 load / N 

 extension / cm 

 When an object is hung from the spring, the length of the spring is 19.2 cm. 

 What is the weight of the object? 

 A 1.4 N B 1.6 N C 2.6 N D 3.0 N 

8 To calculate the power produced by a force, the size of the force must be known. 

 What else needs to be known to calculate the power? 

 the distance the force moves the object 

 the time for which the force acts on the object 

 A   key 

 B   = needed 

 C   = not needed 

 D   


© UCLES 2015 0625/13/M/J/15 [Turn over 

9 A cyclist travels down a hill from rest at point X, without pedalling. 

 The cyclist applies his brakes and the cycle stops at point Y. 

 X 

## Y 

 hill 

 Which energy changes have taken place between X and Y? 

 A gravitational potential → kinetic → thermal (heat) 

 B gravitational potential → thermal (heat) → kinetic 

 C kinetic → gravitational potential → thermal (heat) 

 D kinetic → thermal (heat) → gravitational potential 

10 The diagram shows a manometer with one side connected to a gas cylinder and the other side open to the atmosphere. 

 gas cylinder 

 liquid 

 Which conclusion can be made using only the information from liquid levels in the manometer? 

 A The density of the gas is less than the density of air. 

 B The density of the gas is greater than the density of air. 

 C The pressure of the gas is less than atmospheric pressure. 

 D The pressure of the gas is greater than atmospheric pressure. 


© UCLES 2015 0625/13/M/J/15 

11 The diagram shows a solid block resting on a bench. The dimensions of the block are shown. 

 bench 80 cm 

 20 cm 

 40 cm 

## P 

## R 

## Q 

 On which labelled surface should the block rest to produce the smallest pressure on the bench? 

 A P 

 B Q 

 C R 

 D any of P, Q or R 

12 Small smoke particles suspended in air are viewed through a microscope. 

 The smoke particles move randomly. 

 What does this show? 

 A The air consists of fast-moving molecules. 

 B The pressure of the air is increasing. 

 C There are convection currents in the air. 

 D The temperature of the air is increasing. 

13 Molecules escape from a liquid during evaporation. The temperature of the remaining liquid changes. 

 Which molecules escape and how does the temperature change? 

 molecules escaping 

 temperature of remaining liquid 

 A least energetic decreases 

 B least energetic increases 

 C most energetic decreases 

 D most energetic increases 


© UCLES 2015 0625/13/M/J/15 [Turn over 

14 The thermometer in the diagram has no scale. 

 bulb 

 stem 

 Where must the bulb be placed so that 0 °C can be marked on the stem? 

 A in a freezer 

 B in pure boiling water 

 C in pure cold water 

 D in pure melting ice 

15 A solid is heated from room temperature. The graph shows how its temperature changes with time as it is heated constantly. 

 time 

 temperature 

## 0 

## 0 

room temperature (^) P 

## Q 

## R 

## S T 

 Between which labelled points on the graph is the substance partly solid and partly liquid? 

 A between P and Q 

 B between Q and R 

 C between R and S 

 D between S and T 


© UCLES 2015 0625/13/M/J/15 

16 One method of heat transfer involves the energy travelling at a much greater speed than in other methods. 

 What is the name of this method? 

 A conduction 

 B convection 

 C evaporation 

 D radiation 

17 A cupboard is placed in front of a heater. Air can move through a gap under the cupboard. 

 wall 

 floor 

 heater 

 cupboard 

 air moves through gap 

 Which row describes the temperature, and the direction of movement, of the air in the gap? 

 air temperature air direction 

 A cool away from the heater 

 B cool towards the heater 

 C warm away from the heater 

 D warm towards the heater 

18 What is the frequency of a wave? 

 A the distance that a wavefront travels every second 

 B the distance from one wavefront to the next 

 C the number of wavefronts produced per second 

 D the time taken for a wavefront to pass a certain point 


© UCLES 2015 0625/13/M/J/15 [Turn over 

19 The diagrams represent water waves in a tank. 

 Which diagram represents a wave that changes speed? 

 D 

 deeper water 

 shallower water 

## A 

 barrier 

## B 

 barrier 

## C 

 barrier 

20 Which diagram shows how the light from a candle is reflected by a mirror, and shows the position of the image formed? 

 eye 

 candle 

 image of candle 

## A 

 eye 

 candle 

 eye 

 candle 

 image of candle 

## B 

 image of candle 

## C D 

 eye 

 candle 

 image of candle 

 mirror 

 mirror 

 mirror 

 mirror 


© UCLES 2015 0625/13/M/J/15 

21 Radiation from the Sun is dispersed by a prism. The prism does not absorb any of the radiation. Four identical thermometers are placed, one at each of the labelled positions. 

 In which position does the thermometer show the greatest rise in temperature? 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 

 red light 

 violet light 

 radiation from the Sun 

 prism 

22 A scientist tries to direct a ray of light in a glass block so that no light escapes from the top of the block. 

 However, some light does escape. 

## X 

 glass block 

 ray of light 

 top of block 

 light escaping from top of block 

 The scientist changes angle X and stops the light escaping from the top. 

 Which row in the table describes the change to angle X and the name of the effect produced? 

 change to angle X name of effect produced 

 A decrease total internal reflection 

 B decrease total internal refraction 

 C increase total internal reflection 

 D increase total internal refraction 


© UCLES 2015 0625/13/M/J/15 [Turn over 

23 The frequency of a musical note is increased. 

 A student hearing the sound detects an increase in which property? 

 A loudness of the sound 

 B pitch of the sound 

 C speed of the sound wave 

 D wavelength of the sound wave 

24 A man holding a starting pistol stands 640 m away from a spectator. 

 640 m 

 spectator 

 The spectator hears the sound of the starting pistol 2.0 s after seeing the flash from the pistol. 

 Using this information, what is the speed of sound in air? 

 A 160 m / s B 320 m / s C 640 m / s D 1280 m / s 

25 Which action will demagnetise a magnetised piece of steel? 

 A Cool it in a freezer for several hours. 

 B Hit it repeatedly with a hammer. 

 C Put it in a coil carrying a direct current (d.c.). 

 D Put it near an unmagnetised piece of iron. 


© UCLES 2015 0625/13/M/J/15 

26 An electromagnet with a soft-iron core is connected to a battery and an open switch. The soft-iron core is just above some small soft-iron nails. 

 electromagnet 

 soft-iron core soft-iron nails 

 The switch is now closed, left closed for a few seconds, and then opened. 

 What do the soft-iron nails do as the switch is closed, and what do they do when the switch is then opened? 

 as switch is closed as switch is opened 

 A nails jump up nails fall down 

 B nails jump up nails stay up 

 C nails stay down nails jump up 

 D nails stay down nails stay down 

27 What is the unit of electromotive force (e.m.f.)? 

 A ampere 

 B newton 

 C ohm 

 D volt 

28 Which sample of copper wire has the greatest electrical resistance? 

 length of wire / m diameter of wire / mm 

 A 1.0 2.0 

 B 1.0 4.0 

 C 10 2.0 

 D 10 4.0 


© UCLES 2015 0625/13/M/J/15 [Turn over 

29 The circuit diagram shows a 4.0 Ω resistor and an 8.0 Ω resistor connected to a 6.0 V battery. 

## 8.0 Ω 

## 4.0 Ω 

## 6.0 V 

 What is the current in the 8.0 Ω resistor? 

 A 0 A B 0.50 A C 0.75 A D 1.0 A 

30 The diagram shows a circuit which includes an uncharged capacitor and a switch. 

## X 

## Y 

 switch 

 capacitor 

 The switch can be moved between position X and position Y. 

 What happens to the capacitor when the switch is moved to position X, and what happens when the switch is then moved to position Y? 

 switch at X switch at Y 

 A capacitor charges capacitor charges 

 B capacitor charges capacitor discharges 

 C capacitor discharges capacitor charges 

 D capacitor discharges capacitor discharges 


© UCLES 2015 0625/13/M/J/15 

31 Which component is represented by this circuit symbol? 

 A a bell 

 B a fuse 

 C a relay 

 D a transformer 

32 The diagram shows a 10 Ω resistor and a 20 Ω resistor connected in a potential divider circuit. 

## V 

## 10 Ω 

## 20 Ω 

## 12.0 V 

 What is the reading on the voltmeter? 

 A 4.0 V B 6.0 V C 8.0 V D 12.0 V 


© UCLES 2015 0625/13/M/J/15 [Turn over 

33 In the circuit shown, only one of the fuses has blown, but none of the lamps is lit. 

 Which fuse has blown? 

## A 

## B C 

## D 

 power supply 

34 A student investigates the force on a bar magnet placed near a current-carrying coil. She carries out three different experiments. 

## N S 

 magnet attracted to coil 

 experiment 1 

## N S 

 experiment 2 

## S N 

 experiment 3 

 In experiment 1, the magnet is attracted to the coil. 

 Which row shows what happens in the other two experiments? 

 experiment 2 experiment 3 

 A magnet attracted magnet attracted 

 B magnet attracted magnet repelled 

 C magnet repelled magnet attracted 

 D magnet repelled magnet repelled 


© UCLES 2015 0625/13/M/J/15 

35 Which diagram represents the voltage output of a simple a.c. generator? 

## 0 

 voltage 

 time 

## A 

## 0 

 voltage 

 time 

## B 

## 0 

 voltage 

 time 

## C 

## 0 

 voltage 

 time 

## D 

36 A transformer has 400 turns on its secondary coil. An input voltage of 12 V is applied to the primary coil, and an output voltage of 120 V is induced across the secondary coil. 

 primary coil secondary coil 400 turns 

 input voltage 12 V 

 output voltage 120 V 

 How many turns are on the primary coil of the transformer? 

 A 12 B 40 C 400 D 4000 


© UCLES 2015 0625/13/M/J/15 [Turn over 

37 The diagram shows a cathode-ray tube. 

 cathode anode 

 cathode-rays 

 Which electrode should be heated, and which electrode should be positive? 

 heated electrode positive electrode 

 A anode anode 

 B anode cathode 

 C cathode anode 

 D cathode cathode 

38 α, β and γ-radiations are emitted by radioactive substances. 

 Which statement is correct? 

 A α-radiation consists of charged particles and is the most highly ionising radiation. 

 B β-radiation consists of charged particles and is the most penetrating radiation. 

 C β-radiation consists of uncharged particles and is the least highly ionising radiation. 

 D γ-radiation consists of uncharged particles and is the least penetrating radiation. 

39 The nucleus of an americium atom contains 146 neutrons and 95 protons. It decays by emitting an α-particle. 

 How many neutrons and how many protons remain in the nucleus when this form of americium decays? 

 number of neutrons remaining 

 number of protons remaining 

 A 142 93 

 B 142 95 

 C 144 93 

 D 144 95 


© UCLES 2015 0625/13/M/J/15 

40 Which statement is correct for the nucleus of any atom? 

 A The nucleus contains electrons, neutrons and protons. 

 B The nucleus contains the same number of protons as neutrons. 

 C The nucleus has a total charge of zero. 

 D The nucleus is very small compared with the size of the atom. 


© UCLES 2015 0625/13/M/J/15 

## BLANK PAGE 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2015 0625/13/M/J/15 

## BLANK PAGE 


