 This document consists of 13 printed pages and 3 blank pages. 

 DC (LEG/JG) 91120/3 © UCLES 2015 [Turn over 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

* 4 6 5 9 9 4 7 0 8 7 * 

 PHYSICS 0625/61 Paper 6 Alternative to Practical May/June 2015 1 hour Candidates answer on the Question Paper. No Additional Materials are required. 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all questions. Electronic calculators may be used. You may lose marks if you do not show your working or if you do not use appropriate units. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. 

 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 


© UCLES 2015 0625/61/M/J/15 

**1** The class is determining the weight of a metre rule using a balancing method. 

 The apparatus is shown in Fig. 1.1. 

## P 

 x y 

 bench 

 metre rule 

 pivot 

 50.0 cm mark 

 9 0.0 cm mark 

 Fig. 1.1 

 (a) A student places a load P at the 90.0 cm mark on a metre rule and then balances the rule on a pivot. 

 (i) On Fig. 1.1, measure the distance x from the 90.0 cm mark to the pivot. 

 x = ...........................................................[1] 

 (ii) On Fig. 1.1, measure the distance y from the pivot to the centre of the rule. 

 y = ...........................................................[1] 

 (b) Fig. 1.1 is drawn one tenth of actual size. 

 (i) Calculate the actual distance X from the 90.0 cm mark to the pivot. 

 X = ............................................................... 

 (ii) Calculate the actual distance Y from the pivot to the centre of the rule. 

 Y = ............................................................... [1] 

 (iii) Determine a value W 1 for the weight of the metre rule using the equation W 1 = PX Y 

## , 

 where P = 2.0 N. P is the weight of the load P. 

## W 1 = ...........................................................[1] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/61/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

 (c) The student keeps the pivot at the same position and moves load P to the 95.0 cm mark. He places a load Q of weight Q = 1.0 N, on the metre rule. He adjusts its position so that the rule balances. 

 On Fig. 1.2 mark, with a letter Z, the approximate position of the load Q. You do not need to carry out a detailed calculation. 

## P 

 a 

 bench 

 pivot 

 50.0 cm mark 

 9 5.0 cm mark 

 Fig. 1.2 [1] 

 (d) The student uses the values of P and Q and their distances from the pivot to calculate a second value W 2 for the weight of the rule. 1.12 N W 2 = ............................................................... 

 The student expects W 1 and W 2 to be the same. 

 State whether the results support his idea. Justify your answer by reference to the results. 

 statement .................................................................................................................................. 

 justification ................................................................................................................................ 

 ................................................................................................................................................... 

 ................................................................................................................................................... [2] 

 (e) Suggest one practical reason why it is difficult to obtain exact results with this experiment. 

 ................................................................................................................................................... 

 ...............................................................................................................................................[1] 

 [Total: 8] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/61/M/J/15 

**2** The class is investigating the cooling of water. 

 Fig. 2.1 shows some of the apparatus used. 

 (a) A student measures the initial temperature of hot water in a beaker, as indicated by the thermometer in Fig. 2.1. 

 –10 

 0 

 10 

 20 

 30 

 40 

 50 

 60 

 70 

 80 

 90 

 100 

 110 °C 

 water 

 Fig. 2.1 

 Record this initial temperature in the first row of Table 2.1. 

 (b) The student allows the water in the beaker to cool and records the temperature at 30 s intervals. The readings are shown in the table. 

 Complete the column headings in the table. 

 Table 2.1 

 t / θ / 

 0 

 30 72 

 60 64 

 90 60 

 120 57 

 150 56 [2] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/61/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

 (c) Plot a graph of θ / °C ( y -axis) against t / s ( x -axis). 

## [5] 

 (d) (i) State whether the rate of cooling of the water in the beaker increases, decreases or stays approximately constant during the period of cooling. 

 The rate of cooling of the water ................................................................................... .[1] 

 (ii) Justify your statement by reference to the graph. 

 ........................................................................................................................................... 

 ........................................................................................................................................... 

 .......................................................................................................................................[1] 

 [Total: 9] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/61/M/J/15 

**3** The class is investigating the resistance of lamp filaments in series and parallel circuits. 

 Fig. 3.1 shows the first circuit used. 

 power supply 

## A 

## V 

 Fig. 3.1 

 (a) (i) Write down the readings shown on the meters in Figs. 3.2 and 3.3. 

 Fig. 3.2 

## 0 

## 1 

## 2 

## 3 

## V 

## 8 

## 9 

(^4 5 6 7) 

## 10 

## V S = ............................................................... 

 Fig. 3.3 

## 0 

## 0.2 

## 0.4 0.6^ 

## 0.8 

## 1.0 

## A 

## I S = ............................................................... 

## [2] 

 (ii) Calculate the resistance R S of the lamp filaments using the equation R S = 

## V S 

## I S 

## . 

## R S = ...........................................................[1] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/61/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

 (b) The student rearranges the circuit so that 

- the lamps are in parallel 

- the ammeter will measure the total current in the circuit 

- the voltmeter will measure the potential difference across the lamps. 

 (i) Draw a diagram of this circuit using standard circuit symbols. 

## [2] 

 (ii) The student measures the potential difference V P across the lamps and the current I P in the circuit. 2.0 V V P = ............................................................... 

## 0.60 A 

## I P = ............................................................... 

 Calculate the resistance R P of the lamp filaments using the equation R P = 

## V P 

## I P 

## . 

## R P = ............................................................... 

 (iii) Calculate the ratio 

## R S 

## R P 

## . 

## R S 

## R P 

## = ............................................................... 

## [1] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/61/M/J/15 

 (c) A student wishes to investigate whether the ratio 

## R S 

## R P 

 for the two lamps is the same under all conditions. 

 (i) Suggest a variable that you could change in order to obtain further sets of readings. 

 ........................................................................................................................................... 

 (ii) Explain briefly how you would change this variable. 

 ........................................................................................................................................... 

 ........................................................................................................................................... [2] 

 [Total: 8] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/61/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

## BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2015 0625/61/M/J/15 

**4** The class is investigating the refraction of light passing through a transparent block. 

 Fig. 4.1 shows a student’s ray-trace sheet. 

## A B 

## D C 

## P 3 

## P 4 

 eye 

 ray–trace sheet 

 Fig. 4.1 


© UCLES 2015 0625/61/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

 A student draws the outline ABCD of a transparent block. 

 (a) (i) Draw a normal NL at the centre of side AB. Label the point E where the normal crosses AB. Label the point M where the normal crosses CD. 

 (ii) Draw a line GH , parallel to AB and 6.0 cm above AB. Label the point J where the normal crosses GH. 

 (iii) Draw a line, starting at E , to the left of the normal and at an angle of incidence i = 30 ° to the normal. Label the point F where the line meets GH. [3] (b) The student places two pins P 1 and P 2 on the line FE. 

 On Fig. 4.1, label suitable positions for pins P 1 and P 2. [1] 

 (c) The student observes the images of P 1 and P 2 through side CD of the block so that the images of P 1 and P 2 appear one behind the other. 

 She places two pins P 3 and P 4 between her eye and the block so that P 3 and P 4 , and the 

images of P 1 and P 2 seen through the block, appear one behind the other. The positions of P (^3) and P 4 are shown on Fig. 4.1. **(i)** Draw a line joining the positions of P 3 and P 4. Continue the line until it meets **CD** and label this point **K**. **(ii)** Draw the line **KE**. [1] **(d) (i)** Measure and record the length _a_ between points **F** and **J**. _a_ = ............................................................... **(ii)** Measure and record the length _b_ between points **F** and **E**. _b_ = ............................................................... **(iii)** Measure and record the length _c_ between points **E** and **K**. _c_ = ............................................................... **(iv)** Measure and record the length _d_ between points **M** and **K**. _d_ = ............................................................... [1] **(v)** Calculate _n_ , the refractive index of the material of the block, using the equation _n_ = _ac bd_ 

## . 

 n = ...........................................................[1] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/61/M/J/15 

 (e) Suggest one precaution that you would take with this experiment to obtain reliable results. 

 ................................................................................................................................................... 

 ................................................................................................................................................... 

 ...............................................................................................................................................[1] 

 (f) Fig. 4.2 shows a ray box. 

 lamp slit 

 Fig. 4.2 

 This experiment can be carried out using a ray box instead of the pins. 

 On Fig. 4.1, draw a ray box in a suitable position for this experiment. [1] 

 [Total: 9] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/61/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

## BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2015 0625/61/M/J/15 

**5** The class is investigating the oscillations of a pendulum. 

 Figs. 5.1 and 5.2 show the apparatus. 

 bob 

 one complete oscillation 

 clamp clamp 

 l 

 Fig. 5.1 Fig. 5.2 

 A student measures the length l of the pendulum and takes readings of the time t for 20 complete oscillations. She calculates the period T of the pendulum. T is the time taken for one complete oscillation. She repeats the procedure for a range of lengths. 

 She plots a graph of T^2 / s^2 against l / m. Fig. 5.3 shows the graph. 

 T^2 / s^2 

 l / m 

## 0 

## 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

## 1 

## 2 

## 3 

## 4 

 Fig. 5.3 


© UCLES 2015 0625/61/M/J/15 

 (a) Using the graph, determine the length l of a pendulum that has a period T = 2.0 s. Show clearly on the graph how you obtained the necessary information. 

 l = ...........................................................[3] 

 (b) Explain why measuring the time for 20 swings, rather than for 1 swing, gives a more accurate value for T. 

 ................................................................................................................................................... 

 ...............................................................................................................................................[1] 

 (c) Another student investigates the effect that changing the mass m of the pendulum bob has on the period T of the pendulum. 

 (i) Suggest how many different masses the student should use for this laboratory experiment. 

 number of different masses = ............................................................... 

 (ii) Suggest a range of suitable values for the masses. 

 suitable range of masses = ............................................................... [2] 

 [Total: 6] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/61/M/J/15 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

## BLANK PAGE 


