 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 18 printed pages and 2 blank pages. 

 IB15 06_0625_11/2RP © UCLES 2015 [Turn over 

# *6194823567* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## PHYSICS 0625/11 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice May/June 2015 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A, B, C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2015 0625/11/M/J/15 

1 A geologist compares the volumes of three rocks, X, Y and Z. Three measuring cylinders contain different volumes of water. He places each rock into one of the measuring cylinders. 

 The diagrams show the measuring cylinders before and after the rocks are put in. 

 100 

 90 

 80 

 70 

 60 

 50 

 40 

 30 

 20 

 10 

 100 

 90 

 80 

 70 

 60 

 50 

 40 

 30 

 20 

 10 

 to find the volume of X 

 before after 

 cm^3 cm 3 100 

 90 

 80 

 70 

 60 

 50 

 40 

 30 

 20 

 10 

 100 

 90 

 80 

 70 

 60 

 50 

 40 

 30 

 20 

 10 

 to find the volume of Y 

 before after 

 cm^3 cm 3 100 

 90 

 80 

 70 

 60 

 50 

 40 

 30 

 20 

 10 

 100 

 90 

 80 

 70 

 60 

 50 

 40 

 30 

 20 

 10 

 to find the volume of Z 

 before after 

 cm 3 cm^3 

## X Y^ Z 

 Which row shows the volumes of X, Y and Z in order, from largest to smallest? 

 largest volume 

 smallest volume 

 A X Z Y 

 B Y X Z 

 C Y Z X 

 D Z Y X 


© UCLES 2015 0625/11/M/J/15 [Turn over 

2 A car moves with constant speed and then constant acceleration. 

 Which graph is the speed-time graph for the car? 

speed 

 time 

## A 

## 0 

## 0 

 speed 

 time 

## B 

## 0 

## 0 

 speed 

 time 

## C 

## 0 

## 0 

 speed 

 time 

## D 

## 0 

## 0 

3 A car travels 100 km. The journey takes two hours. The highest speed of the car is 80 km / h, and the lowest speed is 40 km / h. 

 What is the average speed for the journey? 

 A 40 km / h B 50 km / h C 60 km / h D 120 km / h 

4 Diagram 1 shows a piece of foam rubber that contains many pockets of air. Diagram 2 shows the same piece of foam rubber after it has been compressed so that its volume decreases. 

 diagram 1 (before compression) 

 diagram 2 (after compression) 

 What happens to the mass and to the weight of the foam rubber when it is compressed? 

 mass weight 

 A increases increases 

 B increases no change 

 C no change increases 

 D no change no change 


© UCLES 2015 0625/11/M/J/15 

5 A metal block has the dimensions shown. Its mass is 1000 g. 

 2 cm 

 10 cm 

 5 cm 

 What is the density of the metal? 

A (^)  

#  

#  

#  

#  

#  

# × 

# × 

# 1000 2 

(^5 10) g / cm 3 B (^)  

#  

#  

#  

#  

 (^) × × 

# 1000 

(^2 510) g / cm 3 C (^)  

#  

#  

#  

#  

#  

# × 

# × 

# 5 10 

(^1000 2) g / cm 3 D (^)  

#  

#  

#  

#  

#  

# 2 × 5 × 10 

(^1000) g / cm 3 6 Four objects are each acted on by only two forces, as shown. Which object is in equilibrium? **A B** 3.0 N 

## 2.0 N 

## 4.0 N 

## 4.0 N 

## 1.0 N 

## 2.0 N 

## 2.0 N 

## 2.0 N 

## C D 


© UCLES 2015 0625/11/M/J/15 [Turn over 

7 A student measures the length of a spring. She then hangs different weights from the spring. She measures the length of the spring for each different weight. 

 The table shows her results. 

 weight / N length / mm 

 0 520 

 1.0 524 

 2.0 528 

 3.0 533 

 4.0 537 

 5.0 540 

 What is the extension of the spring when the weight hung from it is 3.0 N? 

 A 4 mm B 5 mm C 12 mm D 13 mm 

8 Which energy resource is used to generate electricity without using any moving parts? 

 A geothermal 

 B hydroelectric 

 C nuclear 

 D solar 

9 A cyclist travels down a hill from rest at point X, without pedalling. 

 The cyclist applies his brakes and the cycle stops at point Y. 

 X 

## Y 

 hill 

 Which energy changes have taken place between X and Y? 

 A gravitational potential → kinetic → thermal (heat) 

 B gravitational potential → thermal (heat) → kinetic 

 C kinetic → gravitational potential → thermal (heat) 

 D kinetic → thermal (heat) → gravitational potential 


© UCLES 2015 0625/11/M/J/15 

10 The diagram shows a simple mercury barometer. 

 Which height is used as a measurement of atmospheric pressure? 

## D 

## C 

## B 

## A 

 mercury 

11 A block with flat, rectangular sides rests on a table. 

 block 

 table 

 The block is now turned so that it rests with its largest side on the table. 

 How has this change affected the force and the pressure exerted by the block on the table? 

 force pressure 

 A decreased decreased 

 B decreased unchanged 

 C unchanged decreased 

 D unchanged unchanged 


© UCLES 2015 0625/11/M/J/15 [Turn over 

12 Two states of matter are described as follows. 

 In state 1, the molecules are very far apart. They move about very quickly at random in straight lines until they hit something. 

 In state 2, the molecules are quite closely packed together. They move about at random. They do not have fixed positions. 

 What is state 1 and what is state 2? 

 state 1 state 2 

 A gas liquid 

 B gas solid 

 C liquid gas 

 D solid liquid 

13 The pressure of a fixed mass of gas in a cylinder is measured. The temperature of the gas in the cylinder is then slowly increased. The volume of the cylinder does not change. 

 Which graph shows the pressure of the gas during this process? 

 pressure 

 time 

## A 

## 0 

## 0 

 pressure 

 time 

## B 

 pressure 

 time 

## C 

 pressure 

 time 

## D 

## 0 

## 0 

## 0 

## 0 

## 0 

## 0 


© UCLES 2015 0625/11/M/J/15 

14 The thermometer in the diagram has no scale. 

 bulb 

 stem 

 Where must the bulb be placed so that 0 °C can be marked on the stem? 

 A in a freezer 

 B in pure boiling water 

 C in pure cold water 

 D in pure melting ice 

15 A solid is heated from room temperature. 

 The graph shows how its temperature changes with time as it is heated constantly. 

 At which time has it just become completely liquid? 

## 0 

## 0 A^ B^ C^ D 

 room temperature 

 temperature 

 time 


© UCLES 2015 0625/11/M/J/15 [Turn over 

16 Thermal energy travels through space from the Sun to the Earth. Space is a vacuum. 

 How is thermal energy transferred from the Sun to the Earth? 

 A by conduction only 

 B by convection only 

 C by radiation only 

 D by convection and radiation 

17 A cupboard is placed in front of a heater. Air can move through a gap under the cupboard. 

 wall 

 floor 

 heater 

 cupboard 

 air moves through gap 

 Which row describes the temperature, and the direction of movement, of the air in the gap? 

 air temperature air direction 

 A cool away from the heater 

 B cool towards the heater 

 C warm away from the heater 

 D warm towards the heater 

18 What is the number of wavefronts per second that pass a fixed point? 

 A the amplitude of the wave 

 B the frequency of the wave 

 C the speed of the wave 

 D the wavelength of the wave 


© UCLES 2015 0625/11/M/J/15 

19 The diagrams represent water waves in a tank. 

 Which diagram represents a wave that changes speed? 

 D 

 deeper water 

 shallower water 

## A 

 barrier 

## B 

 barrier 

## C 

 barrier 

20 The diagram shows the electromagnetic spectrum, in order of increasing wavelength. 

 Three types of radiation, P, Q and R, are missing from the spectrum diagram. 

 γ-rays X-rays P visible light Q microwaves R 

 Which types of electromagnetic radiation are represented by P, by Q and by R? 

## P Q R 

 A infra-red radio waves ultraviolet 

 B infra-red ultraviolet radio waves 

 C ultraviolet infra-red radio waves 

 D ultraviolet radio waves infra-red 

21 Radiation from the Sun is dispersed by a prism. The prism does not absorb any of the radiation. Four identical thermometers are placed, one at each of the labelled positions. 

 In which position does the thermometer show the greatest rise in temperature? 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 

 red light 

 violet light 

 radiation from the Sun 

 prism 


© UCLES 2015 0625/11/M/J/15 [Turn over 

22 A scientist tries to direct a ray of light in a glass block so that no light escapes from the top of the block. 

 However, some light does escape. 

 glass block X 

 ray of light 

 top of block 

 light escaping from top of block 

 The scientist changes angle X and stops the light escaping from the top. 

 Which row in the table describes the change to angle X and the name of the effect produced? 

 change to angle X name of effect produced 

 A decrease total internal reflection 

 B decrease total internal refraction 

 C increase total internal reflection 

 D increase total internal refraction 

23 Which row states two properties of sound waves? 

 can travel through type of wave 

 A a vacuum longitudinal 

 B a vacuum transverse 

 C water longitudinal 

 D water transverse 


© UCLES 2015 0625/11/M/J/15 

24 A man holding a starting pistol stands 640 m away from a spectator. 

 640 m 

 spectator 

 The spectator hears the sound of the starting pistol 2.0 s after seeing the flash from the pistol. 

 Using this information, what is the speed of sound in air? 

 A 160 m / s B 320 m / s C 640 m / s D 1280 m / s 

25 A magnet is placed on a balance. The balance reading changes when an iron bar or another magnet is held close to the first magnet. 

 The arrangements are shown in the diagrams. 

(^100) g diagram 1 

## S 

## N 

 g 

 diagram 2 

## S 

## N 

 g 

 diagram 3 

## S 

## N 

## S 

## N 

 iron bar 

 Which row gives the balance reading in diagram 2 and in diagram 3? 

 balance reading in diagram 2 / g 

 balance reading in diagram 3 / g 

 A less than 100 less than 100 

 B less than 100 more than 100 

 C more than 100 less than 100 

 D more than 100 more than 100 


© UCLES 2015 0625/11/M/J/15 [Turn over 

26 An electromagnet with a soft-iron core is connected to a battery and an open switch. The soft-iron core is just above some small soft-iron nails. 

 electromagnet 

 soft-iron core soft-iron nails 

 The switch is now closed, left closed for a few seconds, and then opened. 

 What do the soft-iron nails do as the switch is closed, and what do they do when the switch is then opened? 

 as switch is closed as switch is opened 

 A nails jump up nails fall down 

 B nails jump up nails stay up 

 C nails stay down nails jump up 

 D nails stay down nails stay down 

27 The diagram shows a piece of metal resistance wire. 

 Which wire, made of the same metal, has a smaller resistance? 

 A a wire of the same length with a larger diameter 

 B a wire of the same length with a smaller diameter 

 C a wire of greater length with the same diameter 

 D a wire of greater length with a smaller diameter 

28 What is the unit of electromotive force (e.m.f.)? 

 A ampere 

 B joule 

 C volt 

 D watt 


© UCLES 2015 0625/11/M/J/15 

29 The circuit diagram shows a 4.0 Ω resistor and an 8.0 Ω resistor connected to a 6.0 V battery. 

## 4.0 Ω 8.0 Ω 

## 6.0 V 

 What is the current in the battery? 

 A 0.50 A B 0.75 A C 1.5 A D 2.0 A 

30 The diagram shows a circuit which includes an uncharged capacitor and a switch. 

## X 

## Y 

 switch 

 capacitor 

 The switch can be moved between position X and position Y. 

 What happens to the capacitor when the switch is moved to position X, and what happens when the switch is then moved to position Y? 

 switch at X switch at Y 

 A capacitor charges capacitor charges 

 B capacitor charges capacitor discharges 

 C capacitor discharges capacitor charges 

 D capacitor discharges capacitor discharges 


© UCLES 2015 0625/11/M/J/15 [Turn over 

31 The diagram shows a 3.0 Ω resistor and a 6.0 Ω resistor connected in parallel. 

 3.0 Ω 

## 6.0 Ω 

 What is the total resistance of this arrangement? 

 A less than 3.0 Ω 

 B 3.0 Ω 

 C 4.5 Ω 

 D more than 6.0 Ω 

32 The diagram shows a 10 Ω resistor and a 20 Ω resistor connected in a potential divider circuit. 

## V 

## 10 Ω 

## 20 Ω 

## 12.0 V 

 What is the reading on the voltmeter? 

 A 4.0 V B 6.0 V C 8.0 V D 12.0 V 


© UCLES 2015 0625/11/M/J/15 

33 In the circuit shown, only one of the fuses has blown, but none of the lamps is lit. 

 Which fuse has blown? 

## A 

## B C 

## D 

 power supply 

34 Which diagram shows the pattern of the magnetic field produced by a current-carrying solenoid? 

 A B C D solenoid solenoid solenoid solenoid 

35 What is an advantage of transmitting electricity at a high voltage? 

 A It is faster. 

 B It is safer. 

 C Less energy is wasted. 

 D Less equipment is needed. 


© UCLES 2015 0625/11/M/J/15 [Turn over 

36 A transformer has 1200 turns on its primary coil and 400 turns on its secondary coil. An output voltage of 90 V is induced across the secondary coil. 

 primary coil 1200 turns 

 secondary coil 400 turns 

 output voltage 90 V 

 What is the input voltage of the transformer? 

 A 30 V B 90 V C 270 V D 1200 V 

37 The diagram shows a design for a cathode-ray tube. A tube with this design does not work. 

 power supply 

 cold cathode 

 heated anode vacuum 

 Which change should be made so that the tube works properly to produce cathode rays? 

 A Heat the cathode instead of the anode. 

 B Reverse the connections of the power supply. 

 C Use air in the tube instead of a vacuum. 

 D Use an a.c. power supply instead of a d.c. power supply. 

38 Which row gives the properties of the radiation from radioactive materials? 

 most penetrating radiation most highly ionising radiation 

 A α β 

 B β γ 

 C γ α 

 D γ γ 


© UCLES 2015 0625/11/M/J/15 

39 In a laboratory, a detector of ionising radiation records an average background count rate of 8 counts per second. 

 detector 

 counts / s 

 A radioactive source is now placed close to the detector. The count rate on the detector rises to 200 counts per second. 

 radioactive source 

 detector 

 counts / s 

 What is the count rate due to radiation from the radioactive source? 

 A 25 counts / s 

 B 192 counts / s 

 C 200 counts / s 

 D 208 counts / s 

40 146 Cis a nuclide of carbon. 

 What is the composition of one nucleus of this nuclide? 

 neutrons protons 

 A 6 8 

 B 6 14 

 C 8 6 

 D 14 6 


© UCLES 2015 0625/11/M/J/15 

## BLANK PAGE 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2015 0625/11/M/J/15 

## BLANK PAGE 


