 ® IGCSE is a registered trademark. 

 This document consists of 6 printed pages. 

© UCLES 2017 **[Turn over** 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education 

 Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

**ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/23** 

Paper 2 **October/November 2017** 

MARK SCHEME 

Maximum Mark: 80 

 Published 

This mark scheme is published as an aid to teachers and candidates, to indicate the requirements of the 

examination. It shows the basis on which Examiners were instructed to award marks. It does not indicate the 

details of the discussions that took place at an Examiners’ meeting before marking began, which would have 

considered the acceptability of alternative answers. 

Mark schemes should be read in conjunction with the question paper and the Principal Examiner Report for 

Teachers. 

Cambridge International will not enter into discussions about these mark schemes. 

Cambridge International is publishing the mark schemes for the October/November 2017 series for most 

Cambridge IGCSE 

 ® , Cambridge International A and AS Level components and some Cambridge O Level 

components. 


 PUBLISHED 2017 

 MARK SCHEME NOTES 

The following notes are intended to aid interpretation of mark schemes in general, but individual mark schemes 

may include marks awarded for specific reasons outside the scope of these notes. 

**Types of mark** 

M Method marks, awarded for a valid method applied to the problem. 

A Accuracy mark, awarded for a correct answer or intermediate step correctly obtained. For accuracy marks 

 to be given, the associated Method mark must be earned or implied. 

B Mark for a correct result or statement independent of Method marks. 

When a part of a question has two or more ‘method’ steps, the M marks are in principle independent unless the 

scheme specifically says otherwise; and similarly where there are several B marks allocated. The notation ‘ **dep** ’ 

is used to indicate that a particular M or B mark is dependent on an earlier mark in the scheme. 

**Abbreviations** 

awrt answers which round to 

cao correct answer only 

dep dependent 

FT follow through after error 

isw ignore subsequent working 

nfww not from wrong working 

oe or equivalent 

rot rounded or truncated 

SC Special Case 

soi seen or implied 


 PUBLISHED 2017 

**Question Answer Marks Guidance** 

 1(a) B2 B1 for each 

1(b) (^) n (^) ( _P_ ') = 18 **B1** n (^) ( ( _Q_ ∪ _R_ ) ∩ _P_ (^) ) = 11 **B1** 

##### n ( Q ′ ∪ P ) = 29 B1 

 2 3 x − 1 = 5 + x x = 3 B1 

 3 x − 1 = − 5 − x oe M1 M1 not earned if incorrect 

 equation(s) present 

 x = –1 A1 

 3 

## ( ) ( ) 

## ( )( ) 

 3 1 3 1 3 3 3 1 3 1 

 + + − = + − + 

 p q 

 M1 on LHS take common denominator 

 or rationalise each term or multiply 

 throughout 

_p_ (^) ( 3 + (^1) ) + (^) ( 3 − (^1) ) = 2 _q_ + 6 3 oe **A1** correct eqn with no surds in denominators of LHS equate surd/non surd parts **M1** equate and solve for _p_ or _q_ (≠0) _p_ = 5 and _q_ = 2 **A1** 4 log 3 3 = 1 or log 9 3 = 2 **B1** implied by one correct equation _x_ + 1 = 3 _y_ **B1** _x_ − _y_ = 9 **B1** solve correct equations for _x_ or _y_ **M1** _x_ = 14 and _y_ = 5 **A1** 5(i) 

#### OX = λ( 1.5 b + 3 a ) 

 JJJG B1 

5(ii) (^) _AB_ = **b** − **a** or _BA_ = **a** – **b** JJJG JJJG **B1** 

##### OX = a + μ ( b − a ) 

 JJJG B1 

5(iii) 1.5 λ = μ or 3 λ = 1 − μ **M1** (^) _OX_ = _OX_ JJJG JJJG and equate for **a** or **b** 1 3 μ = 2 9 λ = **A2**^ **A1** for each 


 PUBLISHED 2017 

**Question Answer Marks Guidance** 

5(iv) (^1) 2 = _AX XB_ **B1** Accept 1 : 2 but not 1 :1 2 5(v) (^2) 7 = _OX XD_ **B1** Accept 2 : 7 but not 2 :1 7 6(i) f 2 = f(f) used algebraic ([( _x_ + 2) 2 + 1] + 2) 2 + 1 **M1** numerical or algebraic 17 **A1** 6(ii) (^2) 2 1 − = − _y x y_ **M1** change^ _x_^ and^ _y_ 2 _xy_ − _x_ = _y_ − 2 → _y_ (^) ( 2 _x_ − (^1) ) = _x_ − 2 **M1**^ **M1dep** multiply, collect _y_ terms, factorise 

##### ( ) 

 2 g 2 1 

 − = =    − 

 x y x x 

 A1 correct completion 

 6(iii) 

##### ( ) 

##### ( ) 

##### ( ) 

 2 

 2 

 2 1 2 

 gf 

 2 2 1 1 

 (^) + + −   =  (^) + + −   _x x x_ oe **B1** 

##### ( ) 

##### ( ) 

 2 

 2 

(^2 1 8) 2 2 1 19 + − = + + _x x_ 

#### ( ) 

 2 3 x + 2 = 27 oe 3 x 

 2 + 12 x – 15 = 0 

 M1 their gf = 

 8 

 19 

 and simplify to 

 quadratic equation 

 solve quadratic M1 M1dep 

 Must be of equivalent form 

 x = 1 x = − 5 A1 

7(i) (^1) 0 cos2 3 _v_ = → _t_ = **M1** (^) set _v_ = (^0) and solve for cos2 _t_ → _t_ = 0.615 or 0.616 **A1** 7(ii) 

##### ( ) 

 3 sin2 2 

 s = t − t + c 

 M1A1 M1 for sin2 t and± t 

##### 1.5 ( 0.715) 

 4 4 

 π π t = → s = − = 

 A1 

7(iii) (^) _a_ = −6sin2 _t_ **M1A1 M1** for −sin2 _t t_ = 0.615 → _a_ = –5.66 or –5.65 or − 2 8 **A1**^ condone substitution of degrees 


 PUBLISHED 2017 

**Question Answer Marks Guidance** 

8(i) (^1) cos oe 3 α = **M1** α = 70.5° **A1** 8(ii) speed 2 2 = 3 − 1 **M1** Pythagoras/trig ratio/cosine rule 8 or 2 2 or 2.83 m s –1 (^) **A1** 8(iii) time = 50 _their_ 8 **M1** 25 2 2 or 17.7s **A1** 8(iv) (^) _their_ 8 iii( ) seen **B1** _BC_ = 10 2 or 14.1 m or 14.2 m **B1** 9(i) (^) d 1 (ln ) d _x x x_ = and d (^3 2) 3 d _x x x_ = or d (^3 4) 3 d _x x x_ − − = − **B1** seen Substitution of _their_ derivatives into quotient rule **M1** 3 2 3 6 1 3 ln d ln d × −    =   _x x x x_ (^) _x x x x_ oe **A1** correct completion 9(ii) (^) d 0 1 3ln 0 d = → − = _y x x_ ln _x_ = 1 3 **M1** equate given d d _y x_ to zero and solve for ln _x_ or _x_ 1 _x_ = e^3 **A1** seen 1 3e _y_ = **A1** seen 9(iii) 3 4 ln 1 3ln d _x x x x x_ − = 

### ∫ 

 oe 

 M1 use given statement in (i) 

 4 3 

 1 1 d 3 

 x x x 

 − = 

### ∫ 

 B1 seen anywhere 

 4 3 3 

 ln 1 ln d 9 3 

 x x x x x x 

 = − − 

### ∫ 

 (+C) oe 

 A2 A1 for each term 


 PUBLISHED 2017 

**Question Answer Marks Guidance** 

 10(a) 

 LHS 

##### ( ) 

##### ( ) 

 2 2 sin 1 cos 

 sin 1 cos 

 + + = + 

 x x 

 x x 

 B1 correct addition of fractions 

##### ( ) 

 1 2cos 1 

 sin 1 cos 

 + + = + 

 x 

 x x 

 B1 expansion and use of identity 

##### ( ) 

##### ( ) 

 2 1 cos 2cosec sin 1 cos 

 + = = + 

 x x x x 

 B1 factorisation and completion 

10(b)(i) (^) cosec^2 _y_ − 1 + cosec _y_ − 5 = 0 cosec 2 _y_ + cosec _y_ – 6 = 0 **M1** use of identity for cot 2 _y_ to obtain quadratic in cosec _y_ 

##### ( cosec^ y^ −^2 )( cosec^ y^ +^3 )^ =^0 M1^ solve 3 term quadratic for cosec y 

 1 1 sin , sin 2 3 

 y = y = − 

 M1 obtain values for sin y 

 y = 30 , 150 , 199.5 , 340.5° ° ° ° A2 A1 for 2 values 

10(b)(ii) (^5) 2 or 4 6 π π _z_ + = 7 6 π (2.6…, 3.6…) **M2 M1** equate to 5 6 π **M1** 7 equate to 6 

###### π 

 7 11 or 24 24 

 z 

 π π = (0.916, 1.44) 

 A2 A1 for 1 value 

 11(i) Other root = 4 B1 

f (^) ( _x_ (^) ) = (^) ( _x_ − (^3) ) (^) ( _x_ − (^3) )( _x_ − (^4) ) 3 2 = _x_ − 10 _x_ + 33 _x_ − 36 **M1** multiply out ( _x_ – 3)( _x_ – 3)( _x_ ± _p_ ) _a_ = –10 _b_ = 33 **A2 A1** for each Can be implied by correct cubic 11(ii) _x_ = 6, _x_ = 6, _x_ = 1 _x_ = 2, _x_ = 2, _x_ = 9 _x_ = 1, _x_ = 1, _x_ = 36 **B4 B1** for each of first two sets **B2** for third set 


