 ® IGCSE is a registered trademark. 

 This document consists of 8 printed pages. 

© UCLES 2017 **[Turn over** 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

**ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/22** 

Paper 2 **October/November 2017** 

MARK SCHEME 

Maximum Mark: 80 

 Published 

This mark scheme is published as an aid to teachers and candidates, to indicate the requirements of the examination. It shows the basis on which Examiners were instructed to award marks. It does not indicate the details of the discussions that took place at an Examiners’ meeting before marking began, which would have considered the acceptability of alternative answers. 

Mark schemes should be read in conjunction with the question paper and the Principal Examiner Report for Teachers. 

Cambridge International will not enter into discussions about these mark schemes. 

Cambridge International is publishing the mark schemes for the October/November 2017 series for most Cambridge IGCSE®, Cambridge International A and AS Level components and some Cambridge O Level components. 


###### PUBLISHED 

###### 2017 

The following notes are intended to aid interpretation of mark schemes in general, but individual mark schemes may include marks awarded for specific reasons outside the scope of these notes. 

**Types of mark** 

M Method marks, awarded for a valid method applied to the problem. 

A Accuracy mark, awarded for a correct answer or intermediate step correctly obtained. For accuracy marks to be given, the associated Method mark must be earned or implied. 

B Mark for a correct result or statement independent of Method marks. 

When a part of a question has two or more ‘method’ steps, the M marks are in principle independent unless the scheme specifically says otherwise; and similarly where there are several B marks allocated. The notation ‘ **dep** ’ is used to indicate that a particular M or B mark is dependent on an earlier mark in the scheme. 

**Abbreviations** 

awrt answers which round to cao correct answer only dep dependent FT follow through after error isw ignore subsequent working nfww not from wrong working oe or equivalent rot rounded or truncated SC Special Case soi seen or implied 


###### PUBLISHED 

###### 2017 

**Question Answer Marks Partial Marks** 

(^1) _z_^2 = 7 + 4 3 **B1** (^) Accept 4 + 3 + 4 3 _a_ (^) ( 7 + (^4 3) ) + _b_ ( 2 + (^3) )= 1 + 3 **M1**^ Equate both^3 terms and constant terms to obtain two equations in _a_ and _b_. 7 _a_ + 2 _b_ = 1 4 _a_ + _b_ = 1 **A1** Both correct. Accept equation with a multiple of 3 Attempt to solve a pair of linear simultaneous eqns to _a_ = or _b_ = **M1 M1dep** _a_ = 1and _b_ = − 3 **A1** (^2 2) _x_ 1.5^ + 6 _x_ −0.5^ = _x x_ ( 0.5^ + 5 _x_ −0.5) **M1** (^) Attempt to multiply by _x_ 0.5^ + 5 _x_ −0.5 or _x_ 0.5or divide by _x_ 0.5 2 _x_^ 1.5^ + 6 _x_ −0.5^ = _x_ 1.5^ + 5 _x_ 0.5or _x_^ 1.5^ − 5 _x_ 0.5^ + 6 _x_ −0.5= 0 or 

###### 2 2 6 

###### 5 

 x x x 

###### + 

###### = 

###### + 

 or 

###### 6 

###### 2 

###### 1 5 

 x 

_x_ (^) _x x_ 

###### + 

###### = 

###### + 

 A1 Simplified numerical powers 

 x^2^ − 5 x + 6 = 0 M1^ M1dep obtain a three term quadratic. Allow errors in signs and coefficients but not powers 

#### ( x^ −^3 )^ ( x −^2 )=^0 M1^ Solve a three term quadratic 

 x = 3 or 2 only A1 

 3 Correctly obtain a value of x = 2 B1 Inequality not required 

 Correctly obtain a value of 

###### 1 

###### 2 

 x = − 

 B1 Inequality not required 

###### 1 

 2 and 2 

 x > x < − 

 B1 B1dep mark final answer(s). Allow 1 2 2 

 < x < − 


###### PUBLISHED 

###### 2017 

**Question Answer Marks Partial Marks** 

(^4) _x_ + 4 = _y_^2 **B1** 7 _y_ − _x_ = 16 7 _y_ − 16 + 4 = _y_^2 **B1** (^) allow (^) 2 for16^4 _y_^2 − 7 _y_ + 12 → (^) ( _y_ − (^3) )( _y_ − (^4) )( = (^0) ) or _x_^2^ − 17 _x_ + 60 → (^) ( _x_ − (^5) )( _x_ − (^12) )( = (^0) ) **M1 Attempt** to eliminate _x_ or _y_ to obtain a three term quadratic. Solve a three term quadratic **M1 M1dep** → _y_ = 3, _x_ = 5 or _y_ = 4 _x_ = (^12) **A1** Allow for values seen even if correct pairs not clear. 5(i) (^10) _C_ 4 (^) = 210 **B1** 5(ii) (^) 2 Mystery 2 others = 5 _C_ 2 (^) × 5 _C_ 2 =100 3 Mystery 1 other = 5 _C_ 3 (^) × 5 _C_ 1 = 50 4 Mystery = 5 _C_ 4 =5 Total 155 **B3 B1** for one combination, unsimplifiied **B1** for second combination, unsimplifiied **B1** for third combination, unsimplifiied and total Alternative Method All – 0 Mystery – 1 Mystery **B1** All minus 0 or 1 or both 5 5 5 = 210 − _C_ 4 (^) − _C_ 1 (^) × _C_ 3 **B1**^ **B1dep**^ 1Mystery and 0 mystery unsimplified = 210 − 5 − 5 × 10 = 155 **B1 B1dep** final answer 5(iii) (^) 2M1C1R = 5 _C_ 2 (^) × 3 _C_ 1 (^) × 2 _C_ 1 = 60 1M2C1R = 5 _C_^1 (^) × 3 _C_ 2 (^) × 2 _C_ 1 = 30 1M1C2R 5 3 2 1 1 2 15 

###### = C × C × C 

###### = 

 Total 105 

 B3 B1 for one combination, unsimplifiied B1 for second combination, unsimplifiied B1 for third combination, unsimplifiied and total 

6(i) (^2) 2 

###### 500 

 x h 500 h x 

 π = → = π 

**B1** Ignore units Condone (^) _r_ for _x_ 6(ii) (^) _A_ = 2 π _x_^2 + 2 π _xh_ **M1** Correct expression for _A_ and insert for _their h._ 2 2 

###### 500 

 2 x 2 x x 

 = π + π × π 

###### = 2 

###### 1000 

 2 x x 

 π + 

 A1 Answer given Condone r for x. 


###### PUBLISHED 

###### 2017 

**Question Answer Marks Partial Marks** 

 6(iii) Differentiate: at least one power reduced by 1 M1 

 2 

 d 1000 4 d 

###### A 

 x x x 

 = π − 

###### A1 

(^3) ( ( )) d 1000 0 isw or 4.3 0 d 4 

###### A 

 x x 

##### x π 

###### = → = = 

###### A1 

### ( ) 

 2 4.3 2 1000 349 cm^2 4.3 

##### A = π + = 

 A1 awrt 349 

 2 2 3 

 d 2000 4 ( 0 ) or a positive value d ( min) 

###### A 

 x x 

 = π + > 

 → 

 B1 Correct second differential (need not be evaluated) and conclusion. or Examine correct gradient either side of x = 4.3and conclusion 

7(i) (^) d 3 1 (Gradient or ) d _y x x_ (^) _x_ = − **B1**^ Gradient = Negative reciprocal. Can be implied. 1 1 = 3 _x_^2 − _x_ −^2 **B1** (^) ± One correct term 

#### ( ) 

 3 1 y = 2 x^2 − 2 x^2 + C 

 M1 at least 1 fractional power increased by1. 

 − 10 = 2 − 2 + C → C = − 10 A1 one term correct with simplified coefficients 

 3 1 y = 2 x^2 − 2 x^2 − 10 

 A1 For C from correct working. 

 7(ii) x = 4 → y = 16 − 4 − 10 = 2 B1 

 d 1 6 5.5 d 2 

 y x 

###### → = − = 

###### B1 

 Eqn with their grad and point (4, ...) M1 

 Eqn of tangent: 

###### 2 

###### 5.5 5.5 20 

###### 4 

 y y x x 

###### − 

###### = → = − 

###### − 

 oe 

**A1** Must be in the form (^) _y_ = _mx_ + _c_ but accept 2 _y_ = 11 _x_ − 40 8(i) 2 **A** **_=_** 

###### 4 2 

###### 8 6 

######   

######   

######   

###### B1 

#### ( ) 

###### 2 1 1 6 2 

###### 8 8 4 

− (^) = ^ −   (^) −    

###### A 

###### B2 

 B1 for 

###### 6 2 

###### 8 4 

######  −  

 (^) −    **B1** for 

###### 1 

###### 8 


###### PUBLISHED 

###### 2017 

**Question Answer Marks Partial Marks** 

 8(ii) 4 x + 2 y = − 5 8 x + 6 y = − 9 

###### B1 

 Pre multiply 

###### 5 

###### 9 

######  −  

 (^) −    by a 2 × 2 matrix. **M1** Allow recovery 

###### 1 6 2 5 

###### 8 8 4 9 

 x y 

######    −^  −  

######   =    

######    −^  −  

###### M1 

 Pre multiply their 

###### 5 

###### 9 

######  −  

 (^) −    by _their_ answer to (i) 

###### 1 12 1.5 

###### 8 4 0.5 

 x y 

######    −^   −  

######   =^   =  

######       

 A2 A1 for x value A1 for y value oe Allow both unsimplified 

 9(i) 

## ( ) 

 d 1 ln ln d 

 x x x x x x 

 = × + isw 

 M1A1 Product rule. One correct term + another term. Allow unsimplified. 

9(ii) (^) ∫1+ln d _x x_ = _x_ ln _x_ **M1** Correct use of (i) and must be dealing with 2 terms. soi 

## ∫ ln xdx = x ln x − x + ( C ) A1^ Correct answer with no working is 

 fine. 

 9(iii) 

## [ ] [ ] 

 2 ln d 2 ln2 2 ln 

 k k 

## ∫ x^ x^ =^ k^ k^ −^ k^ −^ k^ k^ − k 

 = k (2ln2 k − l k n −1) 

 M1 Insert limits and subtract correctly using their result from (ii) which must contain an ln function 

# ( (^ ) ) 

 = k ln 2 k^2 − ln k − 1 M1^ Uses^^ n^ ln^ a^ =^ ln^ an somewhere oe 

###### 4 2 

 k ln^ k 1 k 

######     

= (^)  (^)  −   ^   

###### M1 

 Uses ln ln ln 

 a a b b 

###### − = ^  

######   

######   

 or 

 ln a + ln b = ln ab somewhere 

= _k_ (^) ( ln4 _k_ − (^1) ) **A1**^ Answer given Correct completion. 


###### PUBLISHED 

###### 2017 

**Question Answer Marks Partial Marks** 

10(i) (^) _c_ = 1 → 6 1( ) 3 − 7 1( ) 2 + 1 = 0 → (^) ( _c_ − (^1) )is a factor. **B1** Or correct division. Finding or using one correct factor. Attempt to factorise or use long division to obtain 6 _c_^2 … ± 1 or 6 _c_^2 ± _c_ … respectively 

###### M1 

( _c_ − 1 ) (^) ( 6 _c_^2 − _c_ − (^1) ) = 0 **A1** 

#### ( c^ −^1 )^ ( 2 c^ −^1 )^ ( 3 c +^1 )=0^ A1 

###### 1 1 

###### 1, , 

###### 2 3 

 c = − 

###### A1 FT 

 From three different linear factors 

10(ii) (^) d (^2) sec 6cos d _y x x x_ 

###### = + 

 B2 B1 for each term 

 10(iii) 2 

###### 1 

 6cos 7 cos 

 x x 

###### + = 

 B1 B1dep 

Replaces sec^2 _x_ by (^2) 

###### 1 

 cos x 

 → 6cos 3 x − 7cos 2 x + 1 = 0 B1^ B1dep Answer given so all steps must be correct. 

10(iv) (^1 1) cos 1, ,. 2 3 _x_ = − 0, 1.05 or 3 _x_  π → = (^)     

###### , 1.91 

 A2 A1 for 2 values awrt A1 for third value and no others in range. No credit for answers in degrees 

11(i) (^) _y_ = 0 → (^) ( _x_ − (^4) ) (^) ( _x_ + (^1) ) = 0 **M1** Solve 

#### → A is 4,0 ( )nfww A1^ Indication somewhere that 

 x = 4 when y = 0 

11(ii) (^4) + 3 _x_ − _x_^2 = _mx_ + 8 

#### x^2 + ( m − 3 ) x + 4 = 0 

 M1 Eliminate y. 

### ( ) ( ) 

 2 2 b − 4 ac = 0 → m − 3 = 16 M1^ M1dep Use of discriminant 

_m_ = − (^1) **A1** Do not award if _m_ = 7 is not discarded 11(iii) (^) Obtain quadratic _x_^2 + (^) ( _m_ − (^3) ) _x_ + 4 = 0 using _their m_ and attempt to solve. **M1** Working must be seen for any marks to be awarded. Must not be awarded if _m_ is not obtained correctly Point _B_ (2, 6) **A1** 


###### PUBLISHED 

###### 2017 

**Question Answer Marks Partial Marks** 

11(iv) (^) Area under curve 

## ( ) 

(^4 2) = (^) ∫ 2 4 + 3 _x_ − _x_ d _x_ Integrate powers increased in at least 2 terms 

###### M1 

 4 2 3 2 

###### 3 1 

###### 4 

###### 2 3 

 = ^ x + x − x    

###### A1 

###### 64 8 

###### 16 24 8 6 

###### 3 3 

###### = ^ + − ^ − ^ + −  

######     

###### = 

###### 1 

###### 7 

###### 3 

 M1 M1dep Insert limits of their 2 and 4 and subtract in correct order. May be 

 implied by 

###### 2 

###### 18 

###### 3 

###### −… 

 Intercept is (8,0) so area of triangle = 

###### 6 6 

###### 18 

###### 2 

###### × 

###### = 

 M1 Area of triangle using 

 their B = 

#### ( 8 ) 

###### 2 

 B B 

 their x y 

###### − 

###### × 

 or Attempt to find other suitable areas to result in a complete method. 

 Shaded area 

###### 1 2 

###### 18 7 10 

###### 3 3 

###### = − = 

 A1 Accept 10.7. Must not be awarded if point B is not obtained correctly. 


