* 6 5 8 1 4 2 3 2 1 8 * 

 This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. 

 DC (LK/FC) 135366/3 © UCLES 2017 [Turn over 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/13 Paper 1 October/November 2017 2 hours Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all the questions. Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 


© UCLES 2017 0606/13/O/N/17 

 Mathematical Formulae 

### 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

 x b^ b^ ac a 

 = −^ − 

(^2 4) 2 _Binomial Theorem_ ( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( _n_ 

# 1 ) a 

_n_ –1 (^) _b_ + 

# ( 

 n 

# 2 ) a 

_n_ –2 (^) _b_ (^2) + … + 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) a 

_n_ – _r_ (^) _br_ (^) + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( _n_ 

# r ) =^ 

 n! ( n – r )! r! 

### 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ 

 sin^2 A + cos^2 A = 1 

 sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A 

 cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC_ 

 a sin A =^ 

 b sin B =^ 

 c sin C 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

 ∆ = 

 1 2 bc^ sin^ A 


© UCLES 2017 0606/13/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**1** Given that _y_ = 2 sec^2 _i_ and _x_ = tan _i_ 5 , express _y_ in terms of _x_. [2] 

**2** A curve is such that its gradient at the point ( _x_ , _y_ ) is given by 10 e 5 _x_^ + 3. Given that the curve passes though the point (0, 9), find the equation of the curve. [4] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/13/O/N/17 

**3** Find the set of values of _k_ for which the equation _kx_^2 + 3 _x_ 4 + _k_ = 0 has no real roots. [4] 

**4** The graph of _y_ = _a_ cos( _bx_ ) + _c_ has an amplitude of 3, a period of 4 

_r_ (^) and passes through the point 

### , 

### 12 2 

 c r^5 m. Find the value of each of the constants a , b and c. [4] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/13/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**5 (i)** Find ( 7 _x_ 10 )^5 d _x_ 

 3 

## y -. [2] 

**(ii)** Given that (7 _x_ 10) d _x_ (^) 1425 _a_ 6 

## y -^53 = , find the exact value of a. [3] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/13/O/N/17 

**6** When ln _y_ is plotted against _x_^2 a straight line is obtained which passes through the points (0.2, 2.4) and (0.8, 0.9). 

 (i) Express ln y in the form px^2 + q , where p and q are constants. [3] 

 (ii) Hence express y in terms of z , where z e x 

 2 =. [3] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/13/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**7 (i)** Find, in ascending powers of _x_ , the first 3 terms in the expansion of 2 _x_ 4 

 2 6 

c (^) m (^). Give each term in its simplest form. [3] **(ii)** Hence find the coefficient of _x_^2 in the expansion of 2 _x_ 4 _x x_ 

### 2 6 1 2 

c (^) m (^) c + m (^). [4] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/13/O/N/17 

**8** It is given that _y_ ( _x_ 4 ) ( 3 _x_ 1 )^3 

 5 = -. 

**(i)** Show that (^) d ( ) ( ) d _x y_ 3 _x_ 1^3 _Ax B_ **2** = + , where _A_ and _B_ are integers to be found. [5] **(ii)** Hence find, in terms of _h_ , where _h_ is small, the approximate change in _y_ when _x_ increases from 3 to 3 + _h._ [3] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/13/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**9 (a)** A 6-digit number is to be formed using the digits 1, 3, 5, 6, 8, 9. Each of these digits may be used only once in any 6-digit number. Find how many different 6-digit numbers can be formed if 

 (i) there are no restrictions, [1] 

 (ii) the number formed is even, [1] 

 (iii) the number formed is even and greater than 300 000. [3] 

 (b) Ruby wants to have a party for her friends. She can only invite 8 of her 15 friends. 

 (i) Find the number of different ways she can choose her friends for the party if there are no restrictions. [1] 

 Two of her 15 friends are twins who cannot be separated. 

 (ii) Find the number of different ways she can now choose her friends for the party. [3] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/13/O/N/17 

**10 (a)** Given that **A** , **B** and **AB** _a b_ 

### 4 1 2 

### 5 

### 3 

### 4 

### 13 

### 18 

### 8 

### 4 

### = 

### 

### = 

### 

 c m c m =c m, find the value of a and of b. [4] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/13/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

 (b) It is given that X , Y 

### 3 

### 4 

### 5 

### 1 

### 1 

### 4 

### 2 

### 0 

### = 

### 

### 

### = 

### 

 c m c m and XZ = Y. 

 (i) Find X -^1. [2] 

 (ii) Hence find Z. [3] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/13/O/N/17 

### 11 

### A B 

### D C 

### O 

 14.8 cm 

 10 cm 

 The diagram shows a circle, centre O , radius 10 cm. The points A , B , C and D lie on the circumference of the circle such that AB is parallel to DC. The length of the minor arc AB is 14.8 cm. The area of the minor sector ODC is 21.8 cm^2. 

 (i) Write down, in radians, angle AOB. [1] 

 (ii) Find, in radians, angle DOC. [2] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/13/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

 (iii) Find the perimeter of the shaded region. [4] 

 (iv) Find the area of the shaded region. [3] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/13/O/N/17 

**12** The line _y_ = 2 _x_ + 1 intersects the curve _xy_ = 14 2 _y_ at the points _P_ and _Q_. The midpoint of the line _PQ_ is the point _M_. 

 (i) Show that the point c^ 10 , 238 m^ lies on the perpendicular bisector of PQ. [9] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/13/O/N/17 

 The line PQ intersects the y -axis at the point R. The perpendicular bisector of PQ intersects the y -axis at the point S. 

 (ii) Find the area of the triangle RSM. [3] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/13/O/N/17 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

### BLANK PAGE 


