* 7 4 0 7 7 3 9 8 3 0 * 

 This document consists of 16 printed pages. 

 DC (NF/AR) 135372/4 © UCLES 2017 [Turn over 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/23 Paper 2 October/November 2017 2 hours Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all the questions. Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 


© UCLES 2017 0606/23/O/N/17 

 Mathematical Formulae 

### 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

 x 

 b b ac a 

 = 

 − 2 − 4 2 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( _n_ 

# 1 ) a 

_n_ –1 (^) _b_ + 

# ( 

 n 

# 2 ) a 

_n_ –2 (^) _b_ (^2) + … + 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) a 

_n_ – _r_ (^) _br_ (^) + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( _n_ 

# r )^ =^ 

 n! ( n – r )! r! 

### 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ 

 sin^2 A + cos^2 A = 1 

 sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A 

 cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC_ 

 a sin A =^ 

 b sin B =^ 

 c sin C 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

 ∆ = 1 2 

 bc sin A 


© UCLES 2017 0606/23/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**1 (a)** On each of the diagrams below, shade the region which represents the given set. 

### A B 

### C 

###  

### A B 

### C 

###  A  B   C'^  A  B'^   C 

###  

### [2] 

 (b) 

### P Q 

### R 

###  

### 7 2 4 

### 8 

### 1 3 

### 6 

### 5 

 The Venn diagram shows the number of elements in each of its subsets. 

 Complete the following. 

 n( P' ) = ........................................................................ 

 n(( Q  R )  P ) = ...................................................... 

 n( Q'  P ) = ................................................................ [3] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/23/O/N/17 

**2** Solve the equation 3 _x_ 1 = 5 + _x_. [3] 

**3** Find integers _p_ and _q_ such that 

 p q 3 1 3 1 

(^1 3 3) 

- 

### + 

### + 

### = +. [4] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/23/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**4** Solve the simultaneous equations 

 log 3 ^ x^ + 1 h^ = 1 +log 3 y , 

 log 3 ^ x^ y h^ = 2. [5] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/23/O/N/17 

### 5 

### D 

### A 

### O B 

### X 

### C 

 The diagram shows points O , A , B , C , D and X. The position vectors of A , B and C relative to O are OA = a , OB = b and OC = 23 b. The vector CD = 3 a. 

 (i) If OX = m OD express OX in terms of m , a and b. [1] 

 (ii) If AX = nAB express OX in terms of n , a and b. [2] 

 (iii) Use your two expressions for OX to find the value of m and of n. [3] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/23/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

 (iv) Find the ratio AXXB^. [1] 

 (v) Find the ratio OXXD^. [1] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/23/O/N/17 

**6** The functions f and g are defined for real values of _x_ by 

 f ^ x^ h^ = ^ x + 2 h^2 + 1 , 

 g ^ h x^ = 2 xx -^21 , x! 21. 

 (i) Find f 2 ^-^3 h. [2] 

 (ii) Show that g -^1 ^ x^ h^ =g^ x h. [3] 

 (iii) Solve gf ^ h x^ = 198. [4] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/23/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**7** A particle moving in a straight line passes through a fixed point _O_. Its velocity, _v_ ms -^1 , _t_ s after passing through _O_ , is given by _v_ = 3 cos 2 _t_ 1 for _t_ H 0. 

 (i) Find the value of t when the particle is first at rest. [2] 

 (ii) Find the displacement from O of the particle when t 4 

 =^ r. [3] 

 (iii) Find the acceleration of the particle when it is first at rest. [3] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/23/O/N/17 

### 8 

### A 

### B C 

 50 m 1 ms 

 –1 

 3 ms–1 

 a 

 A man, who can row a boat at 3 ms−1^ in still water, wants to cross a river from A to B as shown in the diagram. AB is perpendicular to both banks of the river. The river, which is 50 m wide, is flowing at 1 ms−1^ in the direction shown. The man points his boat at an angle a ° to the bank. Find 

 (i) the angle a , [2] 

 (ii) the resultant speed of the boat from A to B , [2] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/23/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

 (iii) the time taken for the boat to travel from A to B. [2] 

 On another occasion the man points the boat in the same direction but the river speed has increased to 1.8 ms−1^ and as a result he lands at the point C. 

 (iv) State the time taken for the boat to travel from A to C and hence find the distance BC. [2] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/23/O/N/17 

**9 (i)** Show that (^) _x_ ln^ ln _x x x_ 1 3 _x_ d d 3 =^4 

### 

 c m.^ [3] 

 (ii) Find the exact coordinates of the stationary point of the curve y ln x 

 x = 3. [3] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/23/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

 (iii) Use the result from part (i) to find 

 ln x 

 x 4 d x 

### J 

### L 

### KK 

### N 

### P 

## y OO.^ [4] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/23/O/N/17 

**10 (a)** Show that (^1) +sin cos _x x_ + 1 +sin^ cos _x_^ _x_^ = 2 cosec _x_. [3] **(b)** Solve the following equations. **(i)** cot 2 _y_^ + cosec _y_ 5 = 0 for 0 ° G _y_ G 360 ° [5] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/23/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

 (ii) cos  2 z + 4 r j^ =23 for 0 G z G r radians [4] 

 Question 11 is printed on the next page. 


© UCLES 2017 0606/23/O/N/17 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

**11** The cubic equation _x_^3 + _ax_^2 + _bx_ − 36 = 0 has a repeated positive integer root. 

 (i) If the repeated root is x = 3 find the other positive root and the value of a and of b. [4] 

 (ii) There are other possible values of a and b for which the cubic equation has a repeated positive integer root. In each case state all three integer roots of the equation. [4] 


