* 7 6 9 0 4 0 8 7 2 6 * 

 This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. 

 DC (CW) 135370/2 © UCLES 2017 [Turn over 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/21 Paper 2 October/November 2017 2 hours Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all the questions. Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 


© UCLES 2017 0606/21/O/N/17 

 Mathematical Formulae 

### 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

 x 

 b b ac a 

 = 

 − 2 − 4 2 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( _n_ 

# 1 ) a 

_n_ –1 (^) _b_ + 

# ( 

 n 

# 2 ) a 

_n_ –2 (^) _b_ (^2) + … + 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) a 

_n_ – _r_ (^) _br_ (^) + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( _n_ 

# r )^ =^ 

 n! ( n r )! r! 

### 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ 

 sin^2 A + cos^2 A = 1 

 sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A 

 cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC_ 

 a sin A =^ 

 b sin B =^ 

 c sin C 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

 ∆ = 1 2 

 bc sin A 


© UCLES 2017 0606/21/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**1** Solve the inequality ( _x_ 1 ) ( _x_ 5 ) 212. [4] 

**2** Show that (^1) -^1 sin _i_ (^1) + 1 sin^ _i_ = 2 tan _i_ sec _i_. [4] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/21/O/N/17 

**3** Solve the equation log 5 ( 10 _x_ + 5 ) = 2 + log 5 ( _x_ 7 ). [4] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/21/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**4** Solve the following simultaneous equations for _x_ and _y_ , giving each answer in its simplest surd form. 

 3 x + y = 4 

 x 2 y = 5 3 [5] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/21/O/N/17 

**5 (i)** Find (^) dd _x_ ` 3 _x_ 5 + 2 j. [2] **(ii)** Use your answer to part **(i)** to find ( _x_ ) _x_ 3 2 (^30) d y (^) + 2.^ [2] **(iii)** Hence evaluate ( _x_ ) _x_ 3 2 (^30) d 1 2 2 + 

## y.^ [2] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/21/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**6** It is given that 

 p q 

### M 

### 2 

### 3 

### = 

### 

 c m where p and q are integers. 

 (i) If det M =13, find an equation connecting p and q. [1] 

 (ii) Given also that 

 p 

_q_ (^) _p q_ 

### M 

### 4 

### 6 

### 3 

(^3 3) 

### 2 12 

= (^) 2 

### 

(^) + e o, find a second equation connecting^ _p_^ and^ _q_.^ [2] **(iii)** Find the value of _p_ and of _q_. [4] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/21/O/N/17 

**7** Find _y_ in terms of _x_ , given that _x_ 

 y x x 

### 6 2 

 d 

 d 2 

 2 

= + 3 and that when _x_ = 1, _y_ = 3 and (^) _x y_ d d = 1. [6] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/21/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**8** Given that _z_ = _a_ + ( _a_ + 3 ) 3 and _z_^2 = 79 + _b_ 3 , find the value of each of the integers _a_ and _b_. [6] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/21/O/N/17 

**9 (i)** Expand (1 + _x_ )^4 , simplifying all coefficients. [1] 

 (ii) Expand (6 x )^4 , simplifying all coefficients. [2] 

 (iii) Hence express (6 x )^4 (1+ x )^4 = 175 in the form ax^3 + bx^2 + cx + d = 0, where a , b , c and d are integers. [2] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/21/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

 (iv) Show that x = 2 is a solution of the equation in part (iii) and show that this equation has no other real roots. [5] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/21/O/N/17 

**10** In this question **i** is a unit vector due east and **j** is a unit vector due north. Units of length and velocity are metres and metres per second respectively. 

 The initial position vectors of particles A and B , relative to a fixed point O , are 2 i + 4 j and 10 i +14 j respectively. Particles A and B start moving at the same time. A moves with constant velocity i + j and B moves with constant velocity 2 i 3 j. Find 

 (i) the position vector of A after t seconds, [1] 

 (ii) the position vector of B after t seconds. [1] 

 It is given that X is the distance between A and B after t seconds. 

 (iii) Show that X^2 = (8 3 t )^2 + (10 4 t )^2. [3] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/21/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

 (iv) Find the value of t for which (8 3 t )^2 + (10 4 t )^2 has a stationary value and the corresponding value of X. [4] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/21/O/N/17 

**11** The line _y_ = _kx_ + 3, where _k_ is a positive constant, is a tangent to the curve _x_^2 2 _x_ + _y_^2 = 8 at the point _P_. 

 (i) Find the value of k. [4] 

 (ii) Find the coordinates of P. [3] 

 (iii) Find the equation of the normal to the curve at P. [2] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/21/O/N/17 

**12 (i)** Differentiate ( cos _x_ ) -^1 with respect to _x_. [2] 

 (ii) Hence find x 

 y d 

 d given that y = tan x + 4 ( cos x )-^1. [2] 

 (iii) Using your answer to part (ii) find the values of x in the range 0 G x G 2 r such that x 

 y d 

 d = 4. [6] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/21/O/N/17 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

### BLANK PAGE 


