* 4 5 4 1 9 1 2 0 0 1 * 

 This document consists of 16 printed pages. 

 DC (KN/SG) 135362/4 © UCLES 2017 [Turn over 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/12 Paper 1 October/November 2017 2 hours Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all the questions. Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 


© UCLES 2017 0606/12/O/N/17 

 Mathematical Formulae 

## 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

 x a 

 b b ac 2 

## = -^!^2 -^4. 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( _n_ 

# 1 ) a 

_n_ –1 (^) _b_ + 

# ( 

 n 

# 2 ) a 

_n_ –2 (^) _b_ (^2) + … + 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) a 

_n_ – _r_ (^) _br_ (^) + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( _n_ 

# r ) =^ 

 n! ( n – r )! r! 

 . 

## 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ 

 sin^2 A + cos^2 A = 1 

 sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A 

 cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC_ 

 a sin A =^ 

 b sin B =^ 

 c sin C 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

 ∆ = 

 1 2 bc^ sin^ A 


© UCLES 2017 0606/12/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**1 (i)** On the Venn diagram below, draw sets _X_ and _Y_ such that n ^ _X_ + _Y_ h = 0. 

  

 [1] 

 (ii) On the Venn diagram below, draw sets A , B and C such that C 1 ^ A , B hl. 

  

 [2] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/12/O/N/17 

**2** The graph of _y_ = _a_ sin( _bx_ ) + _c_ has an amplitude of 4, a period of r 3 and passes through the point 

 r , 12 

## 2 

## J 

## L 

## KK 

## N 

## P 

 OO. Find the value of each of the constants a , b and c. [4] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/12/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**3 (i)** Find, in ascending powers of _x_ , the first 3 terms in the expansion of 

 x 2 4 

 2 5 

- 

## J 

## L 

## KK 

## N 

## P 

## OO. [3] 

 (ii) Hence find the term independent of x in the expansion of 

 x 

_x_ (^) _x_ 

## 2 

## 4 

(^2 1 3) 5 2 2 

- - 

## J 

## L 

## KK 

## J 

## L 

## KK 

## N 

## P 

## OO 

## N 

## P 

## OO. [3] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/12/O/N/17 

**4** Given that 

 ln y x 

 x 1 

## 3 2 

 2 

 2 = + 

^ (^) + h , find the value of (^) _x y_ d d when _x_ = 2, giving your answer as _a_ + _b_ ln 14 , where _a_ and _b_ are fractions in their simplest form. [6] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/12/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**5** When lg _y_ is plotted against _x_ , a straight line is obtained which passes through the points (0.6, 0.3) and (1.1, 0.2). 

 (i) Find lg y in terms of x. [4] 

 (ii) Find y in terms of x , giving your answer in the form y = A ^ 10 bx h, where A and b are constants. [3] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/12/O/N/17 

**6** Functions f and g are defined, for _x_ 2 0 , by 

 f ( ) x = ln x , g ( ) x = 2 x 2 + 3. 

 (i) Write down the range of f. [1] 

 (ii) Write down the range of g. [1] 

 (iii) Find the exact value of f -^1 g( ) 4. [2] 

 (iv) Find g -^1 ^ h x^ and state its domain. [3] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/12/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**7** A polynomial p^ h _x_ is _ax_^3 + 8 _x_^2 + _bx_ + 5 , where _a_ and _b_ are integers. It is given that 2 _x_ 1 is a factor of p^ h _x_ and that a remainder of –25 is obtained when p^ h _x_ is divided by _x_ + 2. 

 (i) Find the value of a and of b. [5] 

 (ii) Using your values of a and b , find the exact solutions of p ^ h x^ = 5. [2] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/12/O/N/17 

## 8 

## A 

## B 

 4 ms–1^120 m 

 50 m 

 The diagram shows a river which is 120 m wide and is flowing at 4 ms–1. Points A and B are on opposite sides of the river such that B is 50 m downstream from A. A man needs to cross the river from A to B in a boat which can travel at 5 ms–1^ in still water. 

 (i) Show that the man must point his boat upstream at an angle of approximately 65° to the bank. [4] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/12/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

 (ii) Find the time the man takes to cross the river from A to B. [6] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/12/O/N/17 

**9 (a)** 

## 60 

## 40 

## 20 

 x m 

 0 10 20 30 t s 

 The diagram shows the displacement-time graph of a particle P which moves in a straight line such that, t s after leaving a fixed point O , its displacement from O is x m. On the axes below, draw the velocity-time graph of P. 

## 6 

## 4 

## 2 

 0 10 20 30 t s 

 velocity ms–1 

 [3] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/12/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

 (b) A particle Q moves in a straight line such that its velocity, v ms–1, t s after passing through a fixed 

 point O , is given by v = 3 e -^5 t +^32 t , for t H 0. 

 (i) Find the velocity of Q when t = 0. [1] 

 (ii) Find the value of t when the acceleration of Q is zero. [3] 

 (iii) Find the distance of Q from O when t = 0.5. [4] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/12/O/N/17 

## 10 

(^6). 2 cm 5 cm _A_ 5 cm _C_ 

## D 

## B 

## E 

## F 

 The diagram shows an isosceles triangle ABC , where AB = AC = 5 cm. The arc BEC is part of the circle centre A and has length 6.2 cm. The point D is the midpoint of the line BC. The arc BFC is a semi-circle centre D. 

 (i) Show that angle BAC is 1.24 radians. [1] 

 (ii) Find the perimeter of the shaded region. [3] 

 (iii) Find the area of the shaded region. [4] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/12/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**11 (a)** Solve 2 cot^ _z_ + 35 c h = 5 for 0 c G _z_ G 360 c. [4] 

 Question 11(b) is printed on the next page. 


© UCLES 2017 0606/12/O/N/17 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

**(b) (i)** Show that (^) cot _i_ sec +^ _i_ tan^ _i_ = sin _i_. [3] **(ii)** Hence solve (^) cot 3 sec _i_ +^3 tan^ _i_ 3 _i_ =23 for r 2 G _i_ Gr 2 , giving your answers in terms of r. [4] 


