* 8 0 4 7 6 6 9 7 1 6 * 

 This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. 

 DC (AL/FC) 135371/2 © UCLES 2017 [Turn over 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/22 Paper 2 October/November 2017 2 hours Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all the questions. Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 


© UCLES 2017 0606/22/O/N/17 

 Mathematical Formulae 

### 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

 x b^ b^ ac a 

 = −^ − 

(^2 4) 2 _Binomial Theorem_ ( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( _n_ 

# 1 ) a 

_n_ –1 (^) _b_ + 

# ( 

 n 

# 2 ) a 

_n_ –2 (^) _b_ (^2) + … + 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) a 

_n_ – _r_ (^) _br_ (^) + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( _n_ 

# r ) =^ 

 n! ( n – r )! r! 

### 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ 

 sin^2 A + cos^2 A = 1 

 sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A 

 cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC_ 

 a sin A =^ 

 b sin B =^ 

 c sin C 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

 ∆ = 

 1 2 bc^ sin^ A 


© UCLES 2017 0606/22/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**1** If _z_ = 2 + 3 find the integers _a_ and _b_ such that _az_^2 + _bz_ = 1 + 3. [5] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/22/O/N/17 

**2** Solve the equation _x x x_ 

2 _x_ (^) _x_ 5 

### . 6 

.. 

 1 5. 0 5 0 5 

### +^ 0 5 

### + 

### = 

- 

. [5] 

**3** Solve the inequality 3 _x_ 1 2 3 + _x_. [3] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/22/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**4** Solve the simultaneous equations 

 log 2 ^ x^ + 4 h^ = 2 log 2 y , 

 log 2 ^ 7 y x h^ = 4. [5] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/22/O/N/17 

**5** Naomi is going on holiday and intends to read 4 books during her time away. She selects these books from 5 mystery, 3 crime and 2 romance books. Find the number of ways in which she can make her selection in each of the following cases. 

 (i) There are no restrictions. [1] 

 (ii) She selects at least 2 mystery books. [3] 

 (iii) She selects at least 1 book of each type. [3] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/22/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**6** The volume of a closed cylinder of base radius _x_ cm and height _h_ cm is 500 cm^3. 

 (i) Express h in terms of x. [1] 

**(ii)** Show that the total surface area of the cylinder is given by _A_ = 2 _rx_^2 + (^1000) _x_^ cm^2. [2] **(iii)** Given that _x_ can vary, find the stationary value of _A_ and show that this value is a minimum. [5] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/22/O/N/17 

**7** The gradient of the normal to a curve at the point with coordinates ^ _x y_^ , h^ is given by (^1) _x_ 3 _x_. **(i)** Find the equation of the curve, given that the curve passes th **(ii)** Find, in the form _y_ = _mx_ + _c_ , the equation of the tangent to the curve at the point where _x_ = 4. [4] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/22/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**8** The matrix **A** is 

### 2 

### 4 

### 1 

### 3 

 c m. 

 (i) Find ^ 2 A h 1. [3] 

 (ii) Hence solve the simultaneous equations 

 2 y + 4 x + 5 = 0 , 

 6 y + 8 x + 9 = 0. [4] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/22/O/N/17 

**9 (i)** Find (^) dd _x_^ ^ _x_^ ln _x_ h. [2] **(ii)** Hence find (^) y ln _x_ d _x_. [2] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/22/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

 (iii) Hence, given that k 2 0 , show that ln x d x k ln 4 k 1 k 

 2 k 

## y =^ ^^ h.^ [4] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/22/O/N/17 

**10 (i) Without using a calculator** , solve the equation 6 _c_^3 7 _c_ 2 + 1 = 0. [5] 

 It is given that y = tan x + 6 sin x. 

 (ii) Find x 

 y d 

 d 

. [2] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/22/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**(iii)** If (^) _x y_ d^7 d = show that 6 cos 3 _x_^ 7 cos^2 _x_ + 1 = 0. [2] **(iv)** Hence solve the equation (^) _x y_ d^7 d = for 0 G _x_ G _r_ radians. [2] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/22/O/N/17 

### 11 

 y 

 x y = 4 + 3 x – x^2 

 y = mx + 8 

### O A 

### B 

 The diagram shows the curve y = 4 + 3 x x^2 intersecting the positive xaxis at the point A. The line y = mx + 8 is a tangent to the curve at the point B. Find 

 (i) the coordinates of A , [2] 

 (ii) the value of m , [3] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/22/O/N/17 

 (iii) the coordinates of B , [2] 

 (iv) the area of the shaded region, showing all your working. [5] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/22/O/N/17 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

### BLANK PAGE 


