 This document consists of 12 printed pages. 

 DC (CW/SW) 96027/2 © UCLES 2015 [Turn over 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

* 5 8 9 3 8 0 1 2 2 4 * 

 PHYSICS 0625/52 Paper 5 Practical Test October/November 2015 1 hour 15 minutes Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: As listed in the Confidential Instructions. 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name in the spaces at the top of the page. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams, graphs or rough working. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all questions. Electronic calculators may be used. You may lose marks if you do not show your working or if you do not use appropriate units. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. 

 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 For Examiner’s Use 

 1 

 2 

 3 

 4 

 Total 


© UCLES 2015 0625/52/O/N/15 

**1** In this experiment, you will investigate the masses of two loads, **P** and **Q**. 

 Carry out the following instructions, referring to Fig. 1.1. 

## P 

 a b 

## Q 

 10.0 cm mark 

 50.0 cm mark metre rule 

 pivot bench 

 Fig. 1.1 

 (a) Place the metre rule on the pivot at the 50.0 cm mark. Place the load P on the metre rule at the 10.0 cm mark. 

 Place the load Q on the metre rule and adjust its position so that the metre rule is as near as possible to being balanced. 

 (i) Measure, and record in Table 1.1, the distance a between the centre of load P and the 50.0 cm mark. 

 (ii) Measure, and record in the table, the distance b from the 50.0 cm mark to the centre of load Q. 

 (b) Repeat the procedure in (a) using distances a = 35.0 cm, 30.0 cm, 25.0 cm and 20.0 cm. 

 Table 1.1 

 a / cm b / cm 

## [2] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/52/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

 (c) Plot a graph of b / cm ( y -axis) against a / cm ( x -axis). 

## [4] 

 (d) Determine the gradient G of the graph. Show clearly on the graph how you obtained the necessary information. 

## G = ...........................................................[2] 

 (e) The gradient G is the ratio of the masses of the two loads P and Q. 

 Estimate an approximate value for the mass of P. Use this, and your value for G , to determine an estimate for the mass of Q. 

 estimated mass of P = ............................................................... 

 estimated mass of Q = ............................................................... [2] 

 [Total: 10] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/52/O/N/15 

**2** In this experiment, you will investigate the cooling of a thermometer bulb. 

 Carry out the following instructions, referring to Figs. 2.1 and 2.2. You are provided with a beaker labelled A containing hot water, a thermometer and a supply of cold water. 

 thermometer 

 water 

 Fig. 2.1 Fig. 2.2 

 (a) Place the thermometer in the beaker of hot water labelled A. When the thermometer reading stops rising, measure the temperature of the water. In Table 2.1, record this temperature in the θ 1 column at time t = 0 s. [1] 

 (b) Remove the thermometer from the beaker, as shown in Fig. 2.2, immediately start the stopclock and record the temperature θ 1 every 10 s for 1 minute. Record your readings in the table. 

 Table 2.1 

 t / θ 1 / θ 2 / 

 0 

## [3] 

 (c) Add 100 cm 3 of the cold water supplied to the water in beaker A. Replace the thermometer in beaker A. 

 (i) When the thermometer reading stops rising, measure the temperature of the water. Record this temperature in the θ 2 column of the table at time t = 0 s. [1] 

 (ii) Remove the thermometer from the beaker, immediately start the stopclock and record the temperature θ 2 every 10 s for 1 minute. Record the readings in the table. 

 (iii) Complete the column headings in the table. 


© UCLES 2015 0625/52/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

 (d) (i) Using the readings in the θ 1 column of the table, calculate the decrease in temperature Δθ 1 in 60 s. 

 Δθ 1 = ............................................................... 

 (ii) Using the readings in the θ 2 column of the table, calculate the decrease in temperature Δθ 2 in 60 s. 

 Δθ 2 = ............................................................... [2] 

 (iii) State the reason why Δθ 2 is less than Δθ 1. 

 ........................................................................................................................................... 

 .......................................................................................................................................[1] 

 (e) State a precaution that you took when reading the thermometer scale in order to obtain reliable readings. 

 ...............................................................................................................................................[1] 

 (f) Suggest one reason why other students, carrying out this experiment with care, might obtain values of Δθ 1 and Δθ 2 different from your values. 

 ................................................................................................................................................... 

 ...............................................................................................................................................[1] 

 [Total: 10] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/52/O/N/15 

**3** In this experiment, you will investigate the combined resistance of resistors in series and parallel arrangements. 

 The circuit shown in Fig. 3.1 has been set up for you. 

## A 

## V 

 power supply 

## X 

**A B** (^) **Y C Fig. 3.1 (a) (i)** Switch on. Measure and record the potential difference _V_ 1 across the three resistors, and the current _I_ 1 in the circuit. Switch off. _V_ 1 = ............................................................... _I_ 1 = ............................................................... [2] **(ii)** Calculate the combined resistance _R_ 1 of the resistors, using the equation _R_ 1 = 

## V 1 

## I 1 

## . 

## R 1 = ...........................................................[1] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/52/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

 (b) The circuit is now to be rearranged. 

- Disconnect resistors **A** and **B**. 

- Connect together the resistors **A** and **B** in parallel. 

- Connect one side of this parallel combination to the resistor **C** at the point labelled **Y** in     Fig. 3.1. 

- Connect the other side of the parallel combination to the point labelled **X** in Fig. 3.1. 

- Do not make any other changes to the circuit. 

 On Fig. 3.2, complete the diagram of this new circuit using standard circuit symbols. 

## A 

 power supply 

## X 

 Fig. 3.2 [2] 

 (c) (i) Switch on. Measure and record the potential difference V 2 across the three resistors, and the current I 2 in the circuit. Switch off. 

 V 2 = ............................................................... 

 I 2 = ............................................................... [1] 

 (ii) Calculate the combined resistance R 2 of the resistors using the equation R 2 = 

## V 2 

## I 2 

## . 

## R 2 = ............................................................... 


© UCLES 2015 0625/52/O/N/15 

 (iii) Calculate the ratio 

## R 1 

## R 2 

## . 

## R 1 

## R 2 

## = ............................................................... 

## [2] 

 (d) R 1 should equal 2 × R 2 when all three resistors are identical. 

 State whether your results indicate that the resistors are identical. Justify your answer by reference to your results. 

 statement .................................................................................................................................. 

 justification ................................................................................................................................ 

 ................................................................................................................................................... 

 ................................................................................................................................................... [2] 

 [Total: 10] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/52/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

**4** In this experiment, you will investigate reflection using a plane mirror. 

 Carry out the following instructions, using the separate ray-trace sheet provided. You may refer to Fig. 4.1 for guidance. 

## 30° 

## B 

## A 

## L 

## N 

## M R 

 eye 

 hole 

 Fig. 4.1 

 (a) Draw a line 10.0 cm long near the middle of your ray-trace sheet. Label the line MR. Draw a normal to this line that passes through its centre. Label the normal NL. Label the point at which NL crosses MR with the letter A. 

 (b) Draw a line 8.0 cm long from A at an angle of incidence i = 30 ° to the normal, below MR and to the left of the normal. Label the end of this line B. 


© UCLES 2015 0625/52/O/N/15 

 (c) Place the reflecting face of the mirror vertically on the line MR. 

 (d) Place a pin P 1 at point B , 8.0 cm from the point A. 

 (e) Place a pin P 2 on line AB a suitable distance from pin P 1. 

 (f) View the images of pins P 1 and P 2 from the direction indicated by the eye in Fig. 4.1. Place two pins P 3 and P 4 , a suitable distance apart, so that pins P 3 and P 4 , and the images of P 2 and P 1 , all appear exactly one behind the other. Label the positions of P 3 and P 4. 

 (g) Remove the pins and the mirror. Draw the line joining the positions of P 3 and P 4. Extend the line until it meets NL. 

 (h) Measure, and record in the first row of Table 4.1, the angle r between NL and the line joining the positions of P 3 and P 4. 

 Table 4.1 

 i / ° r / ° 

 30 

 30 [2] 

 (i) State two precautions that you took with the pins in this experiment in order to obtain reliable readings. 

1. ............................................................................................................................................... 

 ................................................................................................................................................... 

2. ............................................................................................................................................... 

 ................................................................................................................................................... [2] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/52/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

 (j) Turn your ray-trace sheet through 180 °. Draw a line 8 cm long from A at an angle of incidence i = 30 ° to the normal, below MR and to the right of the normal, as shown in Fig. 4.2. Label the end of this line C. 

## N 

## L 

## R M 

## B 

## C 

 reflecting surface 

## A 

 eye 

 hole 

 Fig. 4.2 

 (k) Place the reflecting face of the mirror vertically on the line MR , so that it is facing you. 

 (l) Repeat the procedure in (d) – (h) using point C and the line AC. Record the angle r in the second row of Table 4.1. 


© UCLES 2015 0625/52/O/N/15 

 (m) A student, doing this experiment with care, expected that the results would show all the incident rays and reflected rays meeting at point A. 

 Suggest a practical reason why the lines may not meet exactly at point A. 

 ................................................................................................................................................... 

 ...............................................................................................................................................[1] 

 Tie your ray-trace sheet into this Booklet between pages 10 and 11. [5] 

 [Total: 10] 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 


