 This document consists of 12 printed pages. 

 DC (LK/AR) 96014/5 © UCLES 2015 [Turn over 

* 2 3 6 6 7 6 2 4 4 8 * 

 PHYSICS 0625/53 Paper 5 Practical Test October/November 2015 1 hour 15 minutes Candidates answer on the Question Paper Additional Materials: As listed in the Confidential Instructions 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name in the spaces at the top of the page. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all questions. Electronic calculators may be used. You may lose marks if you do not show your working or if you do not use appropriate units. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. 

 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

 For Examiner’s Use 

 1 

 2 

 3 

 4 

 Total 


© UCLES 2015 0625/53/O/N/15 

**1** In this experiment, you will investigate the resistance of identical wires connected in parallel. 

 The circuit has been set up for you as shown in Fig. 1.1, with crocodile clip A connected to the right-hand end of wire A. 

 Carry out the following instructions, referring to Fig. 1.1. 

## SRZHUVXSSO\ 

## ZLUH $ 

## $ 

## ZLUH % 

## ZLUH & 

## % & 

## FURFRGLOHFOLSV 

## $ 

 Fig. 1.1 

 (a) (i) On Fig. 1.1, use the appropriate symbol to show a voltmeter connected to measure the potential difference across wire A. [1] 

 (ii) Connect the voltmeter in this position. 

 (b) (i) Switch on. Measure, and record in Table 1.1, for wire A , the potential difference V and the current I in the circuit. Switch off. 

 Table 1.1 

 wire combination V^ /^ V^ I^ / A 

 A 

 A and B 

 A , B and C [3] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/53/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

 (ii) Without disconnecting crocodile clip A , connect crocodile clip B to the right hand end of wire B. It does not matter if crocodile clips A and B touch. 

 Repeat step (b)(i) for this combination of wires, A and B in parallel. 

 (iii) Without disconnecting crocodile clips A or B , connect crocodile clip C to the right hand end of wire C. It does not matter if the crocodile clips touch. 

 Repeat step (b)(i) for this combination of wires, A , B and C in parallel. 

 (c) Calculate the resistance R of each wire combination, using the equation R = V I 

## . 

 resistance of wire A R 1 = ............................. 

 resistance of wires A and B in parallel R 2 = ............................. 

 resistance of wires A , B and C in parallel R 3 = ............................. [3] 

 (d) (i) A student suggests that when 2 identical wires are connected in parallel, their resistance should be equal to 12 of the resistance of a single wire. 

 State whether your findings agree with this suggestion. 

 Justify your answer by reference to your results, giving values to support your justification. 

 statement .......................................................................................................................... 

 ........................................................................................................................................... 

 justification ........................................................................................................................ 

 ........................................................................................................................................... 

 ........................................................................................................................................... [2] 

 (ii) Use your results to suggest the relationship that should exist between R 3 and R 1. 

 ........................................................................................................................................... 

 .......................................................................................................................................[1] 

 [Total: 10] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/53/O/N/15 

**2** In this experiment, you will investigate the refraction of light in a transparent block. You will determine a quantity known as the refractive index of the material of the block. 

 Carry out the following instructions, using the separate ray-trace sheet provided. You may refer to Fig. 2.1 for guidance. 

## KROH 

## WUDQVSDUHQWEORFN 

## H\H 

## $ % 

## & 

## ' 

## / 

## 1 

 Fig. 2.1 

 (a) Draw a line approximately 12 cm long and about 6 cm from the bottom of the ray-trace sheet. Label this line AB. 

 Draw a normal to AB at its centre. Extend the normal for at least 15 cm above AB towards the top of the sheet. Label the normal NL. 

 Label the point at which NL crosses AB with the letter C. 

 (b) Place the transparent block so that its long side is on line AB , as shown in Fig. 2.1. 

 (c) (i) Carefully draw around the block. 

 (ii) Place a pin P 1 at point C. 


© UCLES 2015 0625/53/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

 (iii) View the image of P 1 through the block, from the direction indicated by the eye in Fig. 2.1. Place two pins P 2 and P 3 , a suitable distance apart, so that pins P 2 and P 3 and the image of P 1 all appear exactly one behind the other. Label the positions of P 2 and P 3. 

 (iv) Remove the block and pins from the ray-trace sheet. 

 (v) Label the point at which NL crosses the top edge of the block with the letter D. 

 (vi) Draw a line joining the positions of P 2 and P 3. Extend this line until it crosses NL. Label the point at which the line crosses NL with the letter E. 

 (d) (i) Measure the length a of line DC. 

 a = ............................................................... (ii) Measure the length b of line DE. 

 b = ............................................................... [2] 

 (iii) Calculate a value n 1 for the refractive index of the block, using your values from (d)(i) and (d)(ii) and the equation n 1 = a b 

## . 

 n 1 = ...........................................................[1] 

 Question 2 continues on the next page. 


© UCLES 2015 0625/53/O/N/15 

 (e) (i) Place the block so that its shorter side is on line AB , as shown in Fig. 2.2. 

## WUDQVSDUHQWEORFN 

## $ % 

## & 

## / 

## 1 

## ) 

 Fig. 2.2 

 (ii) Repeat steps (c)(i) to (c)(iv). 

 (iii) Label the point at which NL crosses the top edge of the block with the letter F. 

 (iv) Draw a line joining the new positions of P 2 and P 3. Extend this line until it crosses NL. Label the point at which the line crosses NL with the letter G. 

 (f) (i) Measure the length c of line FC. 

 c = ............................................................... 

 (ii) Measure the length d of line FG. 

 d = ............................................................... 

**(iii)** Calculate a second value _n_ (^) 2 for the refractive index of the block, using your values from **(f)(i)** and **(f)(ii)** and the equation _n_ 2 = _c d_ 

## . 

 n 2 = ............................................................... [1] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/53/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

 (g) A student suggests that a third value for the refractive index could be obtained by repeating the experiment with the block standing on edge, as shown in Fig. 2.3. 

 You are not required to carry out this experiment. 

## WUDQVSDUHQWEORFN 

## $ % 

## & 

## / 

## 1 

 Fig. 2.3 

 State and explain whether this third value for the refractive index is likely to be more or less reliable than the other two values for the refractive index. 

 statement .................................................................................................................................. 

 explanation ............................................................................................................................... 

 ................................................................................................................................................... 

 ................................................................................................................................................... [2] 

 Tie your ray-trace sheet into this Booklet between pages 6 and 7. [4] 

 [Total: 10] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/53/O/N/15 

**3** In this experiment, you will investigate the behaviour of a spring, and then use the spring to determine the weight of an object. 

 The stand and spring have been set up. You are provided with an object X and a set of loads which will be used to stretch the spring. 

 Carry out the following instructions, referring to Fig. 3.1. 

## FODPS 

 l 

## ORDG 

## VSULQJ 

 Fig. 3.1 

 (a) (i) Hang a load of weight L = 1.0 N on the spring. 

 Measure, and record in Table 3.1, the stretched length l of the spring, as indicated in Fig. 3.1. 

 (ii) Describe a precaution that you took when measuring the length of the spring, to ensure a reliable reading. You may draw a diagram. 

## ........................................................................................................................................... 

## .......................................................................................................................................[1] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/53/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

 (iii) Repeat step (a)(i) for L values of 2.0 N, 3.0 N, 4.0 N and 5.0 N. 

 (iv) Remove the load from the spring. 

 Table 3.1 

 L / N l / cm 

 1.0 

 2.0 

 3.0 

 4.0 

 5.0 [1] 

 (b) Plot a graph of l / cm ( y -axis) against L / N ( xaxis). 

## 0 

## 0 

## [4] 

**(c)** Use your graph to determine the length _l_ (^) 0 of the spring with no load attached. _l_ (^) 0 = ...........................................................[1] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/53/O/N/15 

 (d) (i) Suspend object X from the spring and measure the stretched length l of the spring. 

 l = ............................................................... 

 (ii) Use the graph, and your reading from (d)(i) , to determine the weight W of object X. Show clearly on the graph how you obtained your answer. 

 W = ............................................................ N [2] 

 (e) A student measures the weight of a different load using this same method. He gives the weight as 2.564 N. 

 Explain why this is not a suitable number of significant figures for this experiment. 

 ................................................................................................................................................... 

 ................................................................................................................................................... 

 ...............................................................................................................................................[1] 

 [Total: 10] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/53/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

**4** In this experiment, you will investigate the transfer of thermal energy. 

 Carry out the following instructions, referring to Fig. 4.1. 

 thermometers 

 boiling beaker tube 

 Fig. 4.1 

 (a) (i) Pour 40 cm^3 of cold water into the boiling tube. 

 Record, in the first row of Table 4.1, the temperature θC of the cold water. 

 (ii) Pour 300 cm^3 of hot water into the beaker. 

 Record, in the first row of the table, the temperature θH of the hot water. 

 (iii) Lower the boiling tube into the beaker of hot water and immediately start the stopclock. 

 Record, in the table, the temperature θC of the cold water and the temperature θH of the hot water at times t = 30 s, 60 s, 90 s, 120 s, 150 s and 180 s. 

 Table 4.1 

 boiling tube with 40 cm 3 of cold water 

 boiling tube with 20 cm^3 of cold water 

 t / θC / θH / θC / θH / 

 0 

 30 60 

 90 

 120 

 150 

 180 

## [4] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/53/O/N/15 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

 (b) (i) Carefully pour away the water from the boiling tube and the beaker. Make sure that the boiling tube is secure in the clamp. 

 Pour 20 cm^3 of cold water into the boiling tube. Record its temperature θC in the table. 

 Repeat steps (a)(ii) and (a)(iii). 

 (ii) Complete the column headings in the table. 

 (c) Write a conclusion stating how the quantity of cold water in the boiling tube affects its temperature rise. 

 ................................................................................................................................................... 

 ................................................................................................................................................... 

 ...............................................................................................................................................[1] 

 (d) Another student wishes to check your conclusion by repeating the experiment with 10 cm 3 of cold water. 

 Suggest two conditions which he should keep the same so that the comparison will be fair. 

1. ............................................................................................................................................... 

 ................................................................................................................................................... 

2. ............................................................................................................................................... 

 ................................................................................................................................................... [2] 

 (e) Scientists in an industrial laboratory wish to use this experiment as a model of a heat exchanger, which transfers thermal energy between liquids. 

 Suggest two different improvements to the apparatus which would make the heating of the cold water more efficient. 

 For your first suggestion, explain why it would be an improvement. 

 suggestion 1 ............................................................................................................................. 

 explanation ............................................................................................................................... 

 ................................................................................................................................................... 

 suggestion 2 ............................................................................................................................. [3] 

 [Total: 10] 


