® IGCSE is the registered trademark of Cambridge International Examinations. 

### CAMBRIDGE INTERNATIONAL EXAMINATIONS 

Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## MARK SCHEME for the October/November 2015 series 

# 0625 PHYSICS 

## 0625/51 Paper 5 (Practical), maximum raw mark 40 

This mark scheme is published as an aid to teachers and candidates, to indicate the requirements of the examination. It shows the basis on which Examiners were instructed to award marks. It does not indicate the details of the discussions that took place at an Examiners’ meeting before marking began, which would have considered the acceptability of alternative answers. 

Mark schemes should be read in conjunction with the question paper and the Principal Examiner Report for Teachers. 

Cambridge will not enter into discussions about these mark schemes. 

Cambridge is publishing the mark schemes for the October/November 2015 series for most Cambridge IGCSE®, Cambridge International A and AS Level components and some Cambridge O Level components. 


 Cambridge IGCSE – October/November 2015 0625 51 

 NOTES ABOUT MARK SCHEME SYMBOLS AND OTHER MATTERS 

Brackets ( ) around words or units in the mark scheme are intended to indicate wording used to clarify the mark scheme, but the marks do not depend on seeing the words or units in brackets, e.g. 10 (J) means that the mark is scored for 10, regardless of the unit given. 

c.a.o. means "correct answer only". 

e.c.f. means "error carried forward". This indicates that if a candidate has made an earlier mistake and has carried his incorrect value forward to subsequent stages of working, he or she may be given marks indicated by e.c.f. provided his or her subsequent working is correct, bearing in mind his or her earlier mistake. This prevents a candidate being penalised more than once for a particular mistake, but only applies to marks annotated "e.c.f." 

owtte means “or words to that effect” 

Underlining indicates that this must be seen in the answer offered, or something very similar. 

OR indicates alternative answers, any one of which is satisfactory for scoring the mark. 

AND indicates that both answers are required to score the mark. 

Spelling Be generous about spelling and use of English. However, do not allow ambiguities, e.g. spelling which suggests confusion between reflection / refraction / diffraction or thermistor / transistor / transformer. 

Significant Answers are generally acceptable to any number of significant figures ≥ 2, except where figures the mark scheme specifies otherwise. 

Fractions These are only acceptable where specified. 

NOT indicates that an incorrect answer is not to be disregarded, but cancels another otherwise correct alternative offered by the candidate. i.e. right plus wrong penalty applies. 


 Cambridge IGCSE – October/November 2015 0625 51 

1 (a) centre of bob touching rule OR how to avoid parallax OR how to use set-square OR measure to top / bottom of bob and add / subtract radius OR measure to top and bottom of bob and average OR look perpendicularly at scale [1] 

 (b) (i) tS 10–35 (s) [1] 

 (ii) TS = tS / 20 (s) and value 1.3–1.5 [1] TS = 1.40–1.45 [1] 

 (iii) reaction time inaccuracy is a smaller part of total time measured (owtte) [1] 

 (c)(i)(ii) tC recorded, TC = tC / 20 and TC = 1.05–1.3 [1] unit s given for times [1] 

 (d) correct statement for results (expect No) [1] 

 justification must include idea of too different to be within limits of experimental accuracy [1] 

 (e) pivot at 1 cm mark (owtte) OR centre of mass not 50 cm below pivot [1] 

 [Total: 10] 

2 (a) θ (^) R 10–50 (°C) [1] (b) (i) θ (^) H 50–100 (°C) (ii) view thermometer at right angles OR wait until reading stops rising OR stir water OR thermometer not touching sides / bottom [1] (c) θ (^) M value between θ (^) R and θ (^) H [1] (d) correct calculation of θ (^) A and value ⩾ θ (^) M [1] temperatures given in °C [1] (e) any two from: heat loss to surroundings / beaker OR heat loss / drop in temperature by evaporation delays in taking readings amount / mass / volume of cold water different to hot (owtte) thermal capacity of beaker [2 (f) (i) 78 (cm^3 ) [1] (ii) EITHER: Student 1 (80) – read to top of meniscus OR Student 2 (79) – divisions are every 2 cm^3 , not 1 cm^3 OR Student 2 (79) – scale not read at right angles [1] [Total: 10] 


 Cambridge IGCSE – October/November 2015 0625 51 

3 (a) (i) I to at least 2 dp and less than 1A [1] 

 (ii) (iii) all V to at least 1 dp and less than 3V and increasing [1] 

 (b) graph: axes both correctly labelled and right way round, with units [1] suitable scales, to include origin [1] all plots correct to ½ small square [1] good line judgements. Single, thin, continuous line [1] quality of results: all points within 2 small squares on candidate’s straight line [1] 

 (c) (i) intercept correct to ½ small square [1] 

 (ii) ratio correct AND in range 3–7(Ω) [1] 

 (iii) r value equal to ratio, 2 or 3 significant figures and Ω [1] 

 [Total: 10] 

4 (a) ray-trace: normal drawn at centre of MR, second normal 2 cm and 2 mm to right [1] first incident ray at 30° ± 1° [1] first P 1 P 2 at least 5 cm apart [1] reflected rays in correct positions [1] all lines correctly drawn and neat [1] 

 table: i value correct ± 1° from trace [1] r values within 2° of i values [1] 

 (m) any two from: ensure pins are vertical / view bases of pins pins far apart (or greater than 5 cm) ensure mirror is exactly on MR thin lines / sharp pencil / thin pins repeats [2] 

 (n) any one from: thickness of mirror / silvering at back of the glass / mirror thickness of pins difficulty in exactly lining up pins and their images [1] 

 [Total: 10] 


