 This syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. 

 IB18 06_0610_23/3RP © UCLES 2018 [Turn over 

## *7539978956* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

### BIOLOGY 0610/23 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) May/June 2018 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2018 0610/23/M/J/18 

**1** Which organisms carry out respiration, growth, movement and excretion? 

 A all animals and all plants 

 B animals only 

 C arthropods and flowering plants only 

 D plants only 

**2** The diagram shows an animal whose scientific name is _Falco peregrinus_. 

 To which species does it belong? 

 A bird 

 B F. peregrinus 

 C Falco 

 D vertebrate 

**3** What kind of skin do amphibians have? 

 A dry without scales 

 B dry with scales 

 C moist without scales 

 D moist with scales 


© UCLES 2018 0610/23/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**4** The diagram shows a flowering plant. 

 Use the key to identify the plant. 

 flower has four petals 

 plant 

 leaves with jagged edges 

 leaves with smooth edges 

### A B 

 flower has five petals 

 leaves with jagged edges 

 leaves with smooth edges 

### C D 

**5** In which part of the cell does aerobic respiration occur? 

 A cytoplasm 

 B mitochondrion 

 C ribosome 

 D vesicle 

**6** Why do some root cells have root hairs? 

 A for the maintenance of the temperature of the cell sap 

 B to increase the surface area of the cells 

 C to increase the volume of the cell sap 

 D to provide a place for cell nuclei 


© UCLES 2018 0610/23/M/J/18 

**7** The diagram shows a section through an alveolus and through a capillary. 

 capillary wall 

 low carbon dioxide concentration 

 high carbon dioxide concentration 

 capillary 

 red blood cells 

 wall of alveolus air 

# X 

# Y 

 How does carbon dioxide move from Y to X? 

 A by diffusion 

 B by osmosis 

 C by translocation 

 D by transpiration 

**8** Which part of a plant root hair is partially permeable? 

 A the cell sap 

 B the cell surface membrane 

 C the cell vacuole 

 D the cell wall 


© UCLES 2018 0610/23/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**9** The table shows the results of food tests carried out on a fruit. 

 test Benedict’s biuret ethanol iodine 

 result positive positive negative negative 

 What did the fruit contain? 

 A fat and reducing sugar 

 B fat and starch 

 C protein and reducing sugar 

 D protein and starch 

**10** An experiment was carried out to investigate the effect of pH on enzyme action. The graph shows the results. 

 y-axis 

 x-axis 

 What are the labels for the x-axis and the y-axis? 

 x-axis y-axis 

 A pH rate of reaction 

 B pH time 

 C rate of reaction pH 

 D time pH 


© UCLES 2018 0610/23/M/J/18 

**11** The diagram shows a section through a leaf. 

### S R 

### P 

### Q 

 What are structures P, Q, R and S? 

### P Q R S 

 A chloroplast phloem palisade tissue xylem 

 B cuticle xylem chloroplast stoma 

 C phloem palisade tissue cuticle stoma 

 D xylem chloroplast phloem cuticle 

**12** A lack of which dietary component can result in constipation? 

 A fat 

 B fibre (roughage) 

 C carbohydrate 

 D protein 

**13** A woman requires more calcium in her diet when she is pregnant. 

 Which statement explains why? 

 A bone growth in the fetus 

 B muscle growth in the fetus 

 C production of haemoglobin in the fetus 

 D to provide energy for the fetus 


© UCLES 2018 0610/23/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**14** The diagram shows part of the alimentary canal. 

 J 

### K 

### L 

### M 

 Which row correctly identifies the structures labelled J to M? 

### J K L M 

 A oesophagus pancreas small intestine stomach 

 B pancreas small intestine stomach oesophagus 

 C small intestine stomach oesophagus pancreas 

 D stomach oesophagus pancreas small intestine 

**15** The diagram shows the pathway of water from the soil through a plant. 

 soil → X → Y → Z → mesophyll cells 

 Which cells are represented by X, Y and Z? 

### X Y Z 

 A root hair cells root cortex cells xylem 

 B root hair cells xylem root cortex cells 

 C xylem root cortex cells root hair cells 

 D xylem root hair cells root cortex cells 

**16** What will **not** affect the rate of transpiration? 

 A humidity of the atmosphere 

 B number of open stomata 

 C rate of respiration 

 D temperature 


© UCLES 2018 0610/23/M/J/18 

**17** A student places two samples of crushed apple into two beakers, P and Q. The samples are of equal size. She adds 5 cm^3 of pectinase solution to beaker P and 5 cm^3 of water to beaker Q. 

 After five minutes, she places the samples of crushed apple into two different filter funnels, and measures the volume of juice filtering through from each sample over a period of 10 minutes. 

 Which graph shows her results? 

### 0 

### 0 

total volume of juice filtered through 

 time 

### A 

### Q 

### P 

### 0 

### 0 

 total volume of juice filtered through 

 time 

### B 

### P 

### Q 

### 0 

### 0 

total volume of juice filtered through 

 time 

### C 

### Q 

### P 

### 0 

### 0 

 total volume of juice filtered through 

 time 

### D 

### Q 

### P 

**18** During the process of blood clotting, damage to blood vessels stimulates L, and M is converted to N. 

 What are L, M and N? 

### L M N 

 A fibrin platelets fibrinogen 

 B fibrinogen platelets fibrin 

 C platelets fibrin fibrinogen 

 D platelets fibrinogen fibrin 


© UCLES 2018 0610/23/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**19** A child is vaccinated against measles. After a period of time the child is infected with the measles virus. 

 The graph shows the concentration of measles antibodies in the child’s bloodstream during this time. 

 antibody concentration in the blood 

 time 

 Which statement is consistent with the information in the graph? 

 A After the vaccination, the child produced memory cells. 

 B The child had passive immunity against measles. 

 C The measles virus contains antibodies. 

 D The vaccination failed to protect the child against measles. 

**20** Muscles are responsible for the ventilation of the lungs during breathing. 

 Which row describes their action during the inspiration of air? 

 diaphragm muscles 

 external intercostal muscles 

 internal intercostal muscles 

 A contract contract relax 

 B contract relax contract 

 C relax contract relax 

 D relax relax contract 


© UCLES 2018 0610/23/M/J/18 

**21** A student investigated aerobic respiration. 

 woodlice capillary tube 

 gauze drop of liquid 

 soda lime 

 Soda lime absorbs carbon dioxide. 

 If the woodlice are respiring aerobically, what will happen to the drop of liquid? 

 A It will move towards the woodlice as oxygen is used up and carbon dioxide is released. 

 B It will move away from the woodlice as oxygen is used up and carbon dioxide is released. 

 C It will not move as carbon dioxide is used up and oxygen is released. 

 D It will not move as oxygen is used up and carbon dioxide is released. 

**22** The diagram shows a kidney and associated structures. 

 blood in 

 blood out 

### X 

 What is the name of structure X? 

 A pulmonary artery 

 B pulmonary vein 

 C renal artery 

 D renal vein 

**23** What is the correct sequence in a reflex action? 

 A receptor → stimulus → motor neurone → relay neurone → sensory neurone → effector 

 B receptor → stimulus → sensory neurone → relay neurone → motor neurone → effector 

 C stimulus → receptor → motor neurone → relay neurone → sensory neurone → effector 

 D stimulus → receptor → sensory neurone → relay neurone → motor neurone → effector 


© UCLES 2018 0610/23/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**24** The diagram shows the cross-section of an eye. 

### E 

### F 

### G 

 Which statement is true when a person views a near object? 

 A E contracts; G is pulled less; F bulges less; more refraction of light takes place 

 B E contracts; G is pulled less; F bulges more; more refraction of light takes place 

 C E relaxes; G is pulled less; F bulges less; less refraction of light takes place 

 D E relaxes; G is pulled more; F bulges more; less refraction of light takes place 

**25** Compared to the hormonal system, the responses of the nervous system are 

 A faster and of longer-duration. 

 B faster and of shorter-duration. 

 C slower and of longer-duration. 

 D slower and of shorter-duration. 

**26** In an experiment to investigate phototropism, a plant shoot is grown with light coming from one side only. 

 After two days, in which region has the greatest rate of growth occurred? 

 start of experiment 

 light 

 after two days 

 light 

### A 

### B 

### C 

### D 


© UCLES 2018 0610/23/M/J/18 

**27** Crop plants produced by asexual reproduction are identical. This can be a disadvantage. 

 Which statements describe disadvantages? 

 1 Crop plants are produced rapidly. 

 2 A disease could kill all of the plants. 

 3 Only one parent is needed. 

 4 The plants cannot adapt to environmental changes. 

 A 1 and 2 B 1 and 3 C 2 and 4 D 3 and 4 

**28** The table shows some features of artificial insemination and in-vitro fertilisation. 

 Which row shows the features that are correct for both artificial insemination and in-vitro fertilisation? 

 fertilisation happens outside the female reproductive system 

 implantation happens outside the female reproductive system 

 involves sexual intercourse 

 pregnancy develops naturally after implantation 

 A     

 B     

 C     

 D     

**29** The graph shows the concentration of four hormones during the menstrual cycle. 

 Which line represents progesterone? 

 hormone level 

 day of cycle 

 ovulation 

### 0 14 28 

### A 

### C B 

### D 


© UCLES 2018 0610/23/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**30** Cystic fibrosis is an inherited disease. The allele for cystic fibrosis is recessive. 

 A woman is heterozygous and her partner is homozygous dominant. 

 What is true of any children they produce? 

 A All of their children will have cystic fibrosis. 

 B There is a one in two chance of being heterozygous. 

 C There is a one in four chance of being heterozygous. 

 D There is no chance of having the cystic fibrosis allele. 

**31** Which graph shows the correct change in mass of DNA in one cell during cell division by mitosis? 

 mass of DNA 

 time 

### A 

### 0 

### 0 

 mass of DNA 

 time 

### B 

### 0 

### 0 

 mass of DNA 

 time 

### C 

### 0 

### 0 

 mass of DNA 

 time 

### D 

### 0 

### 0 

**32** Cell X contains 16 chromosomes. It divides by meiosis. 

 How many chromosomes do each of the new cells contain? 

 A 4 B 8 C 16 D 32 

**33** Which statement about blood groups in humans is correct? 

 A They are determined by genes and the environment. 

 B They are determined only by the environment. 

 C They are determined only by genes. 

 D They show continuous variation. 


© UCLES 2018 0610/23/M/J/18 

**34** Plants are adapted to survive in different environments. 

 Which are features of xerophytes? 

cuticle (^) of stomatanumber **A** thick few **B** thick many **C** thin few **D** thin many **35** In which form is nitrogen taken up by the roots of plants? **A** as amino acids **B** as nitrate ions **C** as protein **D** as urea **36** What is a community? **A** a unit containing all the organisms in a given area, and their environment, interacting together **B** a unit in which energy is transferred from one organism to the next **C** all of the populations of different species in an ecosystem **D** all the organisms of one species in a given area **37** Which feature of bacteria makes it possible for them to be used to produce human insulin? **A** Bacteria possess plasmids. **B** Bacteria possess exactly the same DNA base sequences as humans. **C** Bacteria possess the same genes for insulin. **D** Bacteria possess the same number of chromosomes as humans. 


© UCLES 2018 0610/23/M/J/18 

**38** In some areas, farmers who grow genetically modified (GM) corn have to make sure there is a gap between GM and non-GM crops. 

 What is the reason for leaving a gap between the crops? 

 A so they can get large machinery into the fields 

 B to prevent cross-pollination between GM and non-GM crops 

 C to prevent disease spreading between crops 

 D to prevent pests attacking crops 

**39** How does eutrophication lead to the death of aquatic organisms? 

 A algae not releasing enough oxygen 

 B algae respiring instead of photosynthesising 

 C decomposer bacteria lowering oxygen concentration in the water 

 D poisoning due to carbon dioxide accumulation in the water 

**40** What is an example of sustainable development? 

 A burning more fossil fuels to provide more energy 

 B catching more fish to feed a growing population 

 C clearing tropical forest to plant large areas of oil palm plants 

 D selective felling of forest trees for timber and replanting cleared areas 


### BLANK PAGE 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2018 0610/23/M/J/18 


