 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 14 printed pages and 2 blank pages. IB16 03_0620_12/3RP© UCLES arch [Turn over 

# *0403093803* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/12 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) February/March 2016 Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet^ 45 Minutes Soft clean eraserSoft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid.Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you.DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

There areanswers A (^) ,forty B, C questions on this paper. Answerand D. all questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet.A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/12/F/M/16 

1 Two gas jars are set up as shown. 

 before after 

 jar 2 

 jar 1 

 jar 2 

 jar 1 

 lid 

 air 

 brown gas 

 The lid is removed and the gas jars are left to stand. After some time the contents of both gas jarsare brown. 

 Which process causes this to happen? A condensation B diffusion C evaporation D filtration 

2 Which piece of apparatus is used to measure variable quantities of liquid in a titration? **A B C D** 

3 Which method separates a mixture of sugar and glass? A dissolve, filter and evaporate B distil and filter C fractionally distil D use chromatography 


© UCLES 2016 0620/12/F/M/16 [Turn over 

4 In which row are the substances correctly classified? 

 element compound mixture A brass sulfur water B sulfur brass water C sulfur water brass D water sulfur brass 

5 Element Q has 4 electrons in its outer shell and has 69 neutrons. Q conducts electricity. What is Q? A carbon (C) B lead (Pb) C thulium (Tm) D tin (Sn) 

6 Which statement describes positive ions? A Positive ions have more electrons than neutrons. B Positive ions have more protons than neutrons. C Positive ions have more electrons than protons. D Positive ions have more protons than electrons. 

7 The electronic structures of atoms X and Y are shown. 

## X Y 

 X and Y form a covalent compound. What is its formula? A X 2 Y B XY C XY 2 D XY 6 

8 The compound magnesium nitrate has the formula Mg(NO 3 ) 2. What is the relative formula mass of magnesium nitrate? A 86 B 134 C 148 D 172 


© UCLES 2016 0620/12/F/M/16 

9 The diagram shows, in cross-section, the arrangement of aluminium and steel wires in an electricpower cable. 

 key = aluminium = steel Which metal wire is the better conductor and which metal wire has the greater mechanical strength? 

better conductor (^) mechanical strengthgreater A aluminium aluminium B aluminium steel C steel aluminium D steel steel 10 When concentrated hydrochloric acid is electrolysed, gases P and Q are formed. P Q 

## – + 

 concentrated hydrochloric acid platinum electrodes 

 What are P and Q? P Q A chlorine hydrogen B chlorine oxygen C hydrogen chlorine D hydrogen oxygen 


© UCLES 2016 0620/12/F/M/16 [Turn over 

11 Which substance could not be used as a fuel to heat water in a boiler? A ethanol B hydrogen C methane D oxygen 

12 Which statement about reactions that produce heat is not correct? A Burning magnesium produces heat energy. B The overall reaction is exothermic. C The products have more energy than the reactants. D The temperature of the surroundings increases. 

13 Which changes increase the rate of reaction? 1 increasing the concentration of the reactants 2 increasing the particle size of a solid reactant 3 increasing the temperature A 1, 2 and 3 B 1 and 2 only C 1 and 3 only D 2 and 3 only 

14 Two reactions involving water are shown. 

# X anhydrous cobalt(II) chloride + water → hydrated cobalt(II) chloride 

 Y iron + oxygen + water → rust Which reactions are reversible by heating? X Y A   B   C   D   


© UCLES 2016 0620/12/F/M/16 

15 Iron is extracted from iron oxide using carbon monoxide as shown. iron oxide + carbon monoxide → iron + carbon dioxide Which statement is correct? A Carbon monoxide is oxidised to carbon dioxide. B Carbon monoxide is reduced to carbon dioxide. C Iron is oxidised to iron oxide. D Iron oxide is oxidised to iron. 

16 Four different solutions, W, X, Y and Z, are tested with Universal Indicator. 

 solution W X Y Z colour with Universal Indicator green^ red^ purple^ orange Which solutions are acidic? A W and Z B X and Z C X only D Y only 

17 Methyl orange turns red in the solution formed when substance R reacts with water. What is R? A calcium oxide B potassium oxide C sodium oxide D sulfur dioxide 

18 A salt is made by adding an excess of an insoluble metal oxide to an acid. How is the excess metal oxide removed from the mixture? A chromatography B crystallisation C distillation D filtration 


© UCLES 2016 0620/12/F/M/16 [Turn over 

19 A substance is heated with aluminium foil in aqueous sodium hydroxide. A gas is produced whichturns damp, red litmus paper blue. 

 Which anion is present in the substance? A carbonate B iodide C nitrate D sulfate 

20 An element does not conduct electricity and exists as diatomic molecules. Where in the Periodic Table is the element found? 

## B 

## A C D 

21 In the Periodic Table, how does the metallic character of the elements vary from left to right across a period? A It decreases. B It increases. C It increases then decreases. D It stays the same. 

22 The elements in a group of the Periodic Table show the following trends. 1 The element with the lowest proton number has the lowest reactivity. 2 All the elements in the group form basic oxides. 3 The density of the elements increases down the group. 4 The melting point of the elements decreases down the group. In which group are the elements found? A I B IV C VI D VII 


© UCLES 2016 0620/12/F/M/16 

23 Which element is a transition metal? 

 melting point in °C density in g / cm^3 colour of oxide A 98 1.0 white B 328 11.3 yellow C 651 1.7 white D 1240 7.4 black 

24 Uranium is a radioactive element but it is also a typical metal. What is not a property of uranium? A It can be hammered into shape. B It conducts heat. C It is used as a source of energy. D It forms covalent compounds. 

25 Which metal reacts with steam but not with cold water? A calcium B copper C sodium D zinc 

26 Iron is extracted from hematite in the blast furnace. 

# The hematite contains silicon(IV) oxide (sand) as an impurity. 

 What reacts with this impurity to remove it? A calcium oxide B carbon C carbon dioxide D slag 


© UCLES 2016 0620/12/F/M/16 [Turn over 

27 The bodies of aircraft are often made using aluminium. Which two properties of aluminium make it suitable for this use? property 1 property 2 A good conductor of electricity good conductor of heat B good conductor of electricity strong C good conductor of heat low density D strong low density 

28 The diagram shows how water is treated to make it suitable for drinking. 

 reservoir 

 stage 1 stage 2 chlorination 

 stage 3 drinking water 

 stage 4 

 What happens in stage 2? A condensation B distillation C evaporation D filtration 

29 Pure air contains nitrogen, oxygen and small amounts of other gases. The noble gases havebeen left out of the table. 

 Which row shows the composition of dry, unpolluted air? nitrogen / % oxygen / % other gases A 21 78 small amount of carbon dioxide B 21 78 small amount of carbon monoxide C 78 21 small amount of carbon dioxide D 78 21 small amount of carbon monoxide 

30 Which pollutant gas can be produced as a result of incomplete combustion of octane, C 8 H 18? A carbon B carbon dioxide C carbon monoxide D methane 


© UCLES 2016 0620/12/F/M/16 

31 Fertilisers are used to provide three elements needed to increase the yield of crops. Which two compounds would provide all three of these elements? A ammonium nitrate and calcium phosphate B ammonium nitrate and potassium sulfate C potassium nitrate and calcium phosphate D potassium nitrate and potassium sulfate 

32 Which statement describes a disadvantage of sulfur dioxide? A It can be used as a bleach in making wood pulp. B It can be used to kill bacteria in food. C It can be used to manufacture sulfuric acid. D It can dissolve the limestone in statues. 

33 Why does a farmer put lime (calcium oxide) on the soil? A to act as a fertiliser B to kill pests C to make the soil less acidic D to make the soil less alkaline 


© UCLES 2016 0620/12/F/M/16 [Turn over 

34 What is the name of fraction X? 

 kerosene 

## X 

 gasoline 

 refinery gas 

 fractions 

 diesel oil lubricating fraction petroleum bitumen A alcohol B fuel oil C naphtha D paraffin 

35 Which pair of molecules are hydrocarbons? A ethane and ethanol B ethane and ethene C ethanoic acid and ethene D ethanol and ethanoic acid 

36 Which bond is not present in the structure of ethanol, CH 3 CH 2 OH? A C–C B H–H C H–O D O–C 


© UCLES 2016 0620/12/F/M/16 

37 Which change on the diagram involves combustion? Some of the reaction products are not shown on the diagram. 

 sugar + yeast in water ethanol 

 carbon dioxide 

 ethene poly(ethene) 

 change A 

 change B 

 change C 

 change D 

38 The structures of three molecules are shown. 

 C 

## O 

## OH 

## H C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## H H C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## H C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## OH 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

 Which homologous series is not represented? A alcohols B alkanes C alkenes D carboxylic acids 

39 Information about four hydrocarbons is shown. 

 hydrocarbon number of carbon atomsin the molecule bromine waterreaction with W 1 no reaction X 2 no reaction Y 3 decolourises it Z 4 decolourises it Which statement is correct? A Hydrocarbon W has the formula CH 4 and can be polymerised. B Hydrocarbon X has the formula C 2 H 4 and can be polymerised. C Hydrocarbon Y has the formula C 3 H 6 and can be polymerised. D Hydrocarbon Z has the formula C 4 H 10 and can be polymerised. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/12/F/M/16 

40 Which structure represents a compound that dissolves in water to form an acidic solution? **A** 

 H 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C O H 

## D 

## B 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C C 

## O 

## O 

## H 


© UCLES 2016 0620/12/F/M/16 

## BLANK PAGE 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeInternational Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge LocalExaminations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2016 0620/12/F/M/16 

## BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2016 0620/12/F/M/16 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements^1 Hhydrogen^1 

(^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Beberyllium 9 atomic number atomic symbol **Key**^ name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mgmagnesium 24 19 Kpotassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Srstrontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Gegermanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 22 Tititanium (^4840) Zrzirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rfrutherfordium– 23 Vvanadium (^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Crchromium (^5242) Momolybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sgseaborgium– (^25) Mnmanganese (^5543) Tctechnetium– (^75) Rerhenium (^186107) Bhbohrium– (^26) Feiron (^5644) Ruruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Iriridium (^192109) Mtmeitnerium– (^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pdpalladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Dsdarmstadtium– (^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rgroentgenium– (^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cdcadmium (^11280) Hgmercury (^201112) Cncopernicium– 114 F _l_ flerovium– 116 Lvlivermorium– (^7) Nnitrogen 1415 Pphosphorus (^3133) Asarsenic (^7551) Sbantimony 12283 Bibismuth 209 (^8) Ooxygen 1616 Ssulfur (^3234) Seselenium (^7952) Tetellurium (^12884) Popolonium– (^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Brbromine 8053 I iodine 12785 Atastatine– (^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Scscandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) Lalanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.) actinium– (^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium^141 (^91) Paprotactinium 231 (^60) Ndneodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pmpromethium– (^93) Npneptunium– (^62) Smsamarium (^15094) Puplutonium– (^63) Eueuropium (^15295) Amamericium– (^64) Gdgadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bkberkelium– (^66) Dydysprosium 16398 Cfcalifornium– (^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Eseinsteinium– (^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Mdmendelevium– (^70) Ybytterbium (^173102) Nonobelium– (^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lrlawrencium– 


