 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. IB16 03_0620_22/3RP© UCLES 2016 [Turn over 

# *6492011221* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/22 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) February/March 2016 Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet^ 45 Minutes Soft clean eraserSoft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid.Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you.DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

There areanswers A (^) ,forty B, C questions on this paper. Answerand D. all questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet.A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/22/F/M/16 

1 Two gas jars are set up as shown. 

 before after 

 jar 2 

 jar 1 

 jar 2 

 jar 1 

 lid 

 air 

 brown gas 

 The lid is removed and the gas jars are left to stand. After some time the contents of both gas jarsare brown. 

 Which process causes this to happen? A condensation B diffusion C evaporation D filtration 

2 Which piece of apparatus is used to measure variable quantities of liquid in a titration? **A B C D** 


© UCLES 2016 0620/22/F/M/16 [Turn over 

3 A sample of a green food colouring was separated into its component colours using paperchromatography. 

 The results obtained are shown. 

 baseline 

 blue spot 

 solvent front yellow spot 

 What is the Rf value of the blue spot? A 0.45 B 0.90 C 1.10 D 2.20 

4 In which row are the substances correctly classified? 

 element compound mixture A brass sulfur water B sulfur brass water C sulfur water brass D water sulfur brass 

5 Which molecule contains only single covalent bonds? A Cl 2 B CO 2 C N 2 D O 2 


© UCLES 2016 0620/22/F/M/16 

6 Which structure represents the sodium chloride lattice? 

 Na –^ C l + C l +^ Na – C l + Na – 

 Na –^ C l + 

 Na –^ C l + C l +^ Na – C l + Na – 

 Na –^ C l + 

## A 

## + – 

## – + – + 

## + – 

## + – 

## – + – + 

## + – 

## B 

## – + 

## + – + – 

## – + 

## – + 

## + – + – 

## – + 

## C 

## + +^ +^ + 

## + + + + 

## + 

## + + 

## + + 

## + 

## + 

## + 

## – 

## D 

## – 

## – 

## – – 

## – 

– (^) – – – 

## – – 

## – 

## – – 

## – 

## – –^ – 

## – 

## – – 

## – – – 

7 X and Y are isotopes of the same element. Which statement is correct? A X and Y have atoms with different numbers of electron shells. B X and Y have atoms with the same nucleon number. C X and Y have atoms with the same number of outer shell electrons. D X and Y have different chemical properties. 

8 Which quantities of chemicals will react exactly with no reactants left over? A 12 g of carbon and 12 g of oxygen B 12 g of carbon and 48 g of oxygen C 12 g of magnesium and 16 g of oxygen D 24 g of magnesium and 16 g of oxygen 


© UCLES 2016 0620/22/F/M/16 [Turn over 

9 Magnesium nitride is formed when magnesium burns in air. Magnesium nitride is an ioniccompound. 

 What is the formula of magnesium nitride? A MgN 2 B Mg 2 N 2 C Mg 2 N 3 D Mg 3 N 2 

10 The electrolysis of concentrated hydrochloric acid is shown. chlorine hydrogen 

 concentrated hydrochloric acid 

## + – 

 platinum electrodes 

 Which statement describes what happens to the electrons during the electrolysis? A They are added to chloride ions. B They are added to hydrogen ions. C They move through the circuit from positive to negative. D They move through the solution from negative to positive. 

11 Which reaction does not occur in the extraction of aluminium? A Al 3+^ + 3e–^ → Al B 2Al 2 O 3 + 3C → 4Al + 3CO 2 C 2O2–^ → O 2 + 4e– D C + O 2 → CO 2 

12 Which substance could not be used as a fuel to heat water in a boiler? A ethanol B hydrogen C methane D oxygen 


© UCLES 2016 0620/22/F/M/16 

13 Which row describes an endothermic reaction? 

 energy needed to break bonds / kJ 

 energy released by forming bonds / kJ temperature A 400 200 decreases B 400 800 decreases C 600 200 increases D 600 800 increases 

14 A reversible reaction is shown. 2NO 2 (g) N 2 O 4 (g) ∆H = –58 kJ / mol Which statement about an equilibrium mixture of NO 2 and N 2 O 4 is correct? A If the pressure is decreased the amount of N 2 O 4 increases. B If the temperature is increased the amount of N 2 O 4 increases. C The rates of formation and decomposition of N 2 O 4 are not the same. D The decomposition of N 2 O 4 is an endothermic reaction. 

15 Which statement about catalysts in chemical reactions is not correct? A Catalysts are not used up in the reaction. B Catalysts increase the energy of the reacting particles. C Catalysts increase the rate of the reaction. D Catalysts lower the activation energy. 

16 Zinc is extracted from zinc blende by roasting it in air to form zinc oxide. The zinc oxide is then heated with carbon to form zinc. The equations for the reactions are shown. 1 2ZnS + 3O 2 → 2ZnO + 2SO 2 2 ZnO + C → Zn + CO Which statement about reactions 1 and 2 is not correct? A In reaction 1 the oxidation state of sulfur increases and it is oxidised. B In reaction 1 the oxidation state of zinc increases and it is oxidised. C In reaction 2 the carbon acts as a reducing agent and it is oxidised. D In reaction 2 the oxidation state of zinc decreases and it is reduced. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/22/F/M/16 [Turn over 

17 The diagram shows an energy level diagram for a reaction. 

 E a energy 

 The diagram shows that the reaction is ......1....... Increasing the temperature increases the rate of reaction. A reason for this is that the ......2........ Which words correctly complete gaps 1 and 2? 1 2 A endothermic activation energy decreases B endothermic collision rate increases C exothermic activation energy decreases D exothermic collision rate increases 

18 Concentrated hydrochloric acid is a strong acid. What is meant by the terms ‘strong’ and ‘acid’? strong acid A contains a low proportion of water accepts protons B contains a low proportion of water donates protons C fully ionised accepts protons D fully ionised donates protons 

19 Which oxide is amphoteric? A aluminium oxide B calcium oxide C carbon monoxide D sodium oxide 


© UCLES 2016 0620/22/F/M/16 

20 A salt is made by adding an excess of an insoluble metal oxide to an acid. How is the excess metal oxide removed from the mixture? A chromatography B crystallisation C distillation D filtration 

21 A substance is heated with aluminium foil in aqueous sodium hydroxide. A gas is produced whichturns damp, red litmus paper blue. 

 Which anion is present in the substance? A carbonate B iodide C nitrate D sulfate 

22 An element does not conduct electricity and exists as diatomic molecules. Where in the Periodic Table is the element found? 

## B 

## A C D 

23 In the Periodic Table, how does the metallic character of the elements vary from left to right across a period? A It decreases. B It increases. C It increases then decreases. D It stays the same. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/22/F/M/16 [Turn over 

24 The elements in a group of the Periodic Table show the following trends. 1 The element with the lowest proton number has the lowest reactivity. 2 All the elements in the group form basic oxides. 3 The density of the elements increases down the group. 4 The melting point of the elements decreases down the group. In which group are the elements found? A I B IV C VI D VII 

25 Brass is an alloy of two metals. Which row gives a correct use for the two metals from which brass is made? metal 1 metal 2 A used for electrical wiring used for galvanising steel B used for galvanising steel used for making aircraft C used for making aircraft used for making cutlery D used for making cooking pans used for electrical wiring 

26 Iron is extracted from hematite in the blast furnace. 

# The hematite contains silicon(IV) oxide (sand) as an impurity. 

 What reacts with this impurity to remove it? A calcium oxide B carbon C carbon dioxide D slag 

27 The reaction below is called the ‘thermite reaction’. 

 2Al + Fe 2 O 3 → 2Fe + Al 2 O 3 Which pair of substances reacts in a similar way? A Fe and MgO B Fe and ZnO C Mg and CuO D Zn and Al 2 O 3 


© UCLES 2016 0620/22/F/M/16 

28 One method of preventing the rusting of iron is to keep oxygen away from the surface of themetal. 

 Which way of rust prevention does not use this method? A coating the iron with grease B connecting the iron to a more reactive metal C covering the iron with plastic D painting the iron 

29 The diagram shows how water is treated to make it suitable for drinking. 

 reservoir 

 stage 1 stage 2 chlorination 

 stage 3 drinking water 

 stage 4 

 What happens in stage 2? A condensation B distillation C evaporation D filtration 

30 Nitrogen monoxide is produced in a car engine when petrol is burnt. The gases from the car engine are passed through a catalytic converter. In the catalytic converter the nitrogen monoxide reacts with carbon monoxide to form nitrogen and carbon dioxide. Which statement is not correct? A Carbon monoxide is oxidised in the catalytic converter. B Carbon monoxide is produced by the complete combustion of petrol. C Nitrogen monoxide is formed by the reaction of nitrogen and oxygen. D Nitrogen monoxide is reduced in the catalytic converter. 

31 Which pollutant gas can be produced as a result of incomplete combustion of octane, C 8 H 18? A carbon B carbon dioxide C carbon monoxide D methane 


© UCLES 2016 0620/22/F/M/16 [Turn over 

32 Fertilisers are used to provide three elements needed to increase the yield of crops. Which two compounds would provide all three of these elements? A ammonium nitrate and calcium phosphate B ammonium nitrate and potassium sulfate C potassium nitrate and calcium phosphate D potassium nitrate and potassium sulfate 

33 What is a property of concentrated sulfuric acid but not of dilute sulfuric acid? A It is a dehydrating agent. B It neutralises alkalis. C It produces a white precipitate with barium nitrate. D It reacts with metals to give a salt and hydrogen. 

34 Why does a farmer put lime (calcium oxide) on the soil? A to act as a fertiliser B to kill pests C to make the soil less acidic D to make the soil less alkaline 


© UCLES 2016 0620/22/F/M/16 

35 What is the name of fraction X? 

 kerosene 

## X 

 gasoline 

 refinery gas 

 fractions 

 diesel oil lubricating fraction petroleum bitumen A alcohol B fuel oil C naphtha D paraffin 

36 Which compounds are alkanes? 

 compound W X Y Z formula C 4 H 10 C 5 H 10 C 6 H 12 C 6 H 14 A W and X B W and Z C X and Y D Y and Z 


© UCLES 2016 0620/22/F/M/16 [Turn over 

37 The statements below are about the alcohol homologous series. The alcohols have the same ......1...... formula. The alcohols have ......2...... chemical properties because they have the same ......3....... The melting points of the alcohols ......4...... as the number of carbon atoms increases. Which words correctly complete gaps 1–4? 1 2 3 4 A general different functional group decrease B general similar electronic structure increase C general similar functional group increase D molecular similar functional group increase 

38 Which structure represents a compound that dissolves in water to form an acidic solution? **A** 

 H 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C O H 

## D 

## B 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C C 

## O 

## O 

## H 


© UCLES 2016 0620/22/F/M/16 

39 The partial structure of an addition polymer is shown. 

 C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

 C l 

 C l 

 C l 

 H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

 What is the structure of the monomer used to make this polymer? 

## C 

## H 

## C 

 C l 

 C l H 

## C 

## H 

## C 

 C l C l C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## A 

## C 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

 C l C 

## H 

## H 

## C H 

 C l 

 H H 

## B C D 

40 Which statement about polymers is correct? A Addition polymers are all biodegradable. B Condensation polymers can all be hydrolysed to give amino acids. C Condensation polymers only exist in nature. D Forming addition polymers produces only one product. 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeInternational Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge LocalExaminations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2016 0620/22/F/M/16 

## BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2016 0620/22/F/M/16 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements^1 Hhydrogen^1 

(^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Beberyllium 9 atomic number atomic symbol **Key**^ name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mgmagnesium 24 19 Kpotassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Srstrontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Gegermanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 22 Tititanium (^4840) Zrzirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rfrutherfordium– 23 Vvanadium (^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Crchromium (^5242) Momolybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sgseaborgium– (^25) Mnmanganese (^5543) Tctechnetium– (^75) Rerhenium (^186107) Bhbohrium– (^26) Feiron (^5644) Ruruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Iriridium (^192109) Mtmeitnerium– (^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pdpalladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Dsdarmstadtium– (^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rgroentgenium– (^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cdcadmium (^11280) Hgmercury (^201112) Cncopernicium– 114 F _l_ flerovium– 116 Lvlivermorium– (^7) Nnitrogen 1415 Pphosphorus (^3133) Asarsenic (^7551) Sbantimony 12283 Bibismuth 209 (^8) Ooxygen 1616 Ssulfur (^3234) Seselenium (^7952) Tetellurium (^12884) Popolonium– (^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Brbromine 8053 I iodine 12785 Atastatine– (^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Scscandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) Lalanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.) actinium– (^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium^141 (^91) Paprotactinium 231 (^60) Ndneodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pmpromethium– (^93) Npneptunium– (^62) Smsamarium (^15094) Puplutonium– (^63) Eueuropium (^15295) Amamericium– (^64) Gdgadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bkberkelium– (^66) Dydysprosium 16398 Cfcalifornium– (^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Eseinsteinium– (^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Mdmendelevium– (^70) Ybytterbium (^173102) Nonobelium– (^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lrlawrencium– 


