 This document consists of 16 printed pages. DC (SC/CB) 165277/2 © UCLES 2019 [Turn over 

* 9 1 6 4 1 1 6 7 8 1 * 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/23 Paper 2 May/June 2019 2 hours Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write your centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. Answer all the questions. Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 


© UCLES 2019 0606/23/M/J/19 

### Mathematical Formulae 

### 1. ALGEBRA 

### Quadratic Equation 

### For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

 x b^ b^ ac a 

#### = −^ − 

(^2 4) 2 

### Binomial Theorem 

( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( _n_ 1 ) _an_ –1^ _b_ + (^) ( _n_ 2 ) _an_ –2^ _b_^2 + … + (^) ( _nr_ ) _an_ – _r_^ _br_^ + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( _nr_ ) = (^) ( _n_ – _n_! _r_ )! _r_! 

### 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

### Identities 

### sin^2 A + cos^2 A = 1 

### sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A 

### cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

### Formulae for ∆ ABC 

### a 

### sin A =^ 

### b 

### sin B =^ 

### c 

### sin C 

### a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

### ∆ = 12 bc sin A 


© UCLES 2019 0606/23/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**1** Find the values of _x_ for which 9 _x_^2 + 18 _x_ 1 1 _x_ + 1. [3] 

**2** Differentiate tan 3 _x_ cos 2 _x_ with respect to _x_. [4] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/23/M/J/19 

**3** The points _A_ , _B_ and _C_ have coordinates (4, 7), (-3, 9) and (6, 4) respectively. 

 (i) Find the equation of the line, L , that is parallel to the line AB and passes through C. Give your answer in the form ax + by = c , where a , b and c are integers. [3] 

 (ii) The line L meets the x -axis at the point D and the y -axis at the point E. Find the length of DE. [2] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/23/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**4** The function f is defined, for 0° G _x_ G 360°, by f ( ) _x_ = 4 + 3 sin 2 _x_. 

 (i) Sketch the graph of y = f( x ) on the axes below. 

 y 

 x 

#### 8 

#### 0 

#### 0° 60° 120° 180° 240° 300° 360° 

#### –8 

#### [3] 

 (ii) State the period of f. [1] 

 (iii) State the amplitude of f. [1] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/23/M/J/19 

**5 (a)** Given that **A** = 

#### 2 

#### 0 

#### 6 

#### 3 

#### 1 

#### 4 

## f p and that^ A^ +^ O^ = A , 

 (i) state the order of the matrix A , [1] 

 (ii) write down the matrix O. [1] 

 (b) B = 

#### 1 

#### 3 

#### 1 

#### 2 

 e o and C = 

#### . 

#### . 

#### . 

#### . 

#### 0 4 

#### 0 6 

#### 0 2 

#### 0 2 

e o (^). Find the matrix product **BC** and state a relationship between **B** and **C**. [2] **(c) D** = _a a_ 1 

#### 4 

e5 o (^) , where _a_ is a positive integer. Find **D** (^1) in terms of _a_. [2] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/23/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**6** A curve has equation _y_ = ` 3 _x_ 5 j 3 2 _x_. 

**(i)** Find (^) dd _xy_^ and _x y_ d d^2 2.^ [4] **(ii)** Find the exact value of the _x_ -coordinate of each of the stationary points of the curve. [2] **(iii)** Use the second derivative test to determine the nature of each of the stationary points. [2] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/23/M/J/19 

#### 7 

 50 cm D C 

#### O 

#### A B 

#### 9 

 4 rrad 

 The diagram shows a company logo, ABCD. The logo is part of a sector, AOB , of a circle, centre O and radius 50 cm. The points C and D lie on OB and OA respectively. The lengths AD and BC are equal and AD : AO is 7 : 10. The angle AOB is 49 r^ radians. 

 (i) Find the perimeter of ABCD. [5] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/23/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

 (ii) Find the area of ABCD. [3] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/23/M/J/19 

**8 (a) (i)** Given that _x_^2 _px_^1 _x_ 4 _x qx rx_ 

 8 

e (^) o (^) = 16 13 + 10 + 7 +f, find the value of each of the constants _p_ , _q_ and _r_. [3] **(ii)** Explain why there is no term independent of _x_ in the binomial expansion of _x_^2 _px_^1 8 e (^) o (^). [1] **(b)** In the binomial expansion of 1 2 _x n_ e (^) o (^) , where _n_ is a positive integer, the coefficient of _x_ is 30. Form an equation in _n_ and hence find the value of _n_. [4] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/23/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

#### 9 

#### O 

 y = 7 

 y = 16 x^2 

 y 

 x 

 The diagram shows the curve y = 16 x^2 and the straight line y = 7. Find the area of the shaded region. You must show all your working. [6] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/23/M/J/19 

#### 10 

#### O 

#### A B 

#### P 

#### R 

 p Q 

 q 

 The diagram shows a triangle OAB. The point P is the midpoint of OA and the point Q lies on OB such that OQ = 41 OB. The position vectors of P and Q relative to O are p and q respectively. 

 (i) Find, in terms of p and q , an expression for each of the vectors PQ , QA and PB. [3] 

 (ii) Given that PR = mPB and that QR = nQA , find an expression for PQ in terms of m , n , p and q. [2] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/23/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

 (iii) Using your expressions for PQ , find the value of m and of n. [4] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/23/M/J/19 

**11** A particle travelling in a straight line passes through a fixed point _O_. The displacement, _x_ metres, of the particle, _t_ seconds after it passes through _O_ , is given by _x_ = 5 _t_ + sin _t_. 

 (i) Show that the particle is never at rest. [2] 

 (ii) Find the distance travelled by the particle between t = 3 rand t = r 2. [2] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/23/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

 (iii) Find the acceleration of the particle when t = 4. [2] 

 (iv) Find the value of t when the velocity of the particle is first at its minimum. [2] 

 Question 12 is printed on the next page. 


© UCLES 2019 0606/23/M/J/19 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. 

**12 Do not use a calculator in this question.** 

 The line y = 4 x 6 intersects the curve y = 10 x^3 19 x^2 x at the points A , B , and C. Given that C is the point (2, 2), find the coordinates of the midpoint of AB. [10] 


