 This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. 

 DC (CE/CB) 165273/2 © UCLES 2019 [Turn over 

* 2 0 4 9 1 1 2 3 0 9 * 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/11 Paper 1 May/June 2019 2 hours Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all the questions. Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 


© UCLES 2019 0606/11/M/J/19 

## Mathematical Formulae 

## 1. ALGEBRA 

## Quadratic Equation 

## For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

## x 

## a 

## b b ac 

## 2 

## = -^!^2 -^4 

## Binomial Theorem 

( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( 

## n 

# 1 ) a 

_n_ –1 (^) _b_ + 

# ( 

## n 

# 2 ) a 

_n_ –2 (^) _b_ (^2) + … + 

# ( 

## n 

# r ) a 

_n_ – _r_ (^) _br_ (^) + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( 

## n 

# r ) =^ 

## n! 

## ( n – r )! r! 

## 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

## Identities 

## sin^2 A + cos^2 A = 1 

## sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A 

## cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

## Formulae for ∆ ABC 

 a 

## sin A =^ 

 b 

## sin B =^ 

 c 

## sin C 

## a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

## ∆ = 

### 1 

## 2 bc^ sin^ A 


© UCLES 2019 0606/11/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**1 (a)** On the Venn diagrams below, shade the region indicated. 

### A B 

### C 

### A B 

### C 

###   

### ( A + B ) , C ( A ' , B ) + C 

### [2] 

 (b) On the Venn diagram below, draw sets P , Q and R such that 

 P 1 R , Q 1 R and P + Q = Q. 

  

### [2] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/11/M/J/19 

**2 (i)** Write down the amplitude of 4 sin 3 _x_ 1. [1] 

 (ii) Write down the period of 4 sin 3 x 1. [1] 

 (iii) On the axes below, sketch the graph of y = 4 sin 3 x 1 for 90 ° G x ° G 90 °. 

### 6 

### 4 

### 2 

### –90 –60 –30 0 30 60 90 

### –2 

### –4 

### –6 

 y 

 x 

### [3] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/11/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**3** The polynomial p ( ) _x_ = ( 2 _x_ 1 )( _x_ + _k_ )12 , where _k_ is a constant. 

 (i) Write down the value of p ( k ). [1] 

 When p( x ) is divided by x + 3 the remainder is 23. 

 (ii) Find the value of k. [2] 

 (iii) Using your value of k , show that the equation p ( ) x =25 has no real solutions. [3] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/11/M/J/19 

**4 (i)** The first 3 terms, in ascending powers of _x_ , in the expansion of 2 _bx_ 

 8  + j can be written as a + 256 x + cx^2. Find the value of each of the constants a , b and c. [4] 

 (ii) Using the values found in part (i) , find the term independent of x in the expansion of 

2 _bx_ 2 _x_ (^) _x_^3 8 2 ` (^) + j b l (^). [3] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/11/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**5** A particle _P_ is moving with a velocity of 20 ms-^1 in the same direction as e o 43. 

 (i) Find the velocity vector of P. [2] 

 At time t = 0 s, P has position vector e o 21 relative to a fixed point O. 

 (ii) Write down the position vector of P after t s. [2] 

 A particle Q has position vector e 1817 o relative to O at time t = 0 s and has a velocity vector e 128 o ms-^1. 

 (iii) Given that P and Q collide, find the value of t when they collide and the position vector of the point of collision. [3] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/11/M/J/19 

### 6 

 y 

 x 

### P 

### O 

### Q 

 y = 3 x^2 2 x + 1 y = 2 x + 5 

 The diagram shows the curve y = 3 x^2 2 x + 1 and the straight line y = 2 x + 5 intersecting at the points P and Q. Showing all your working, find the area of the shaded region. [8] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/11/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**7 (a)** Solve log 3 _x_ + log 9 _x_ = 12. [3] 

 (b) Solve log 4 ( 3 y 2 10 ) = 2 log 4 ( y 1 )+ 21. [5] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/11/M/J/19 

**8** It is given that f ( ) _x_ = 5 e _x_ 1 for _x_ d R. 

 (i) Write down the range of f. [1] 

 (ii) Find -^1 and state its domain.f [3] 

 It is given also that g ( ) x = x^2 + 4 for x d R. 

 (iii) Find the value of fg(1). [2] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/11/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

 (iv) Find the exact solutions of g^2 ( ) x = 40. [3] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/11/M/J/19 

**9** In this question all lengths are in centimetres. 

 A closed cylinder has base radius r , height h and volume V. It is given that the total surface area of the cylinder is 600r and that V , r and h can vary. 

 (i) Show that V = 300 r r r r^3. [3] 

 (ii) Find the stationary value of V and determine its nature. [5] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/11/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**10** When lg _y_ is plotted against _x_^2 a straight line graph is obtained which passes through the points (2, 4) and (6, 16). 

 (i) Show that y 10 A^ Bx 

 2 = +^ , where A and B are constants. [4] 

 (ii) Find y when x 3 

### = 1. [2] 

 (iii) Find the positive value of x when y = 2. [3] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/11/M/J/19 

**11** It is given that _y x_^2 1 2 _x_ 32 

 1 = ^ + j^ j. 

**(i)** Show that (^) _x y x Px Qx_ 2 3 

### 1 

 d 

 d 2 

 1 

 2 = 

- 

### + + 

  j 

 , where P and Q are integers. [5] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/11/M/J/19 

 (ii) Hence find the equation of the normal to the curve y x^2 1 2 x 32 

 1 = ^ + j^ j at the point where x = 2, giving your answer in the form ax + by + c = 0, where a , b and c are integers. [4] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/11/M/J/19 

### BLANK PAGE 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. 


