 This document consists of 16 printed pages. 

 DC (LK) 165275/2 © UCLES 2019 [Turn over 

* 3 0 3 4 6 8 0 6 6 3 * 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/22 Paper 2 May/June 2019 2 hours Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all the questions. Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 


© UCLES 2019 0606/22/M/J/19 

 Mathematical Formulae 

### 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

 x 

 b b ac a 

### = 

### − 2 − 4 

### 2 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( _n_ 

# 1 ) a 

_n_ –1 (^) _b_ + 

# ( 

 n 

# 2 ) a 

_n_ –2 (^) _b_ (^2) + … + 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) a 

_n_ – _r_ (^) _br_ (^) + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( _n_ 

# r ) =^ 

 n! ( n – r )! r! 

### 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ 

 sin^2 A + cos^2 A = 1 

## sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A 

## cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC_ 

 a sin A =^ 

 b sin B =^ 

 c sin C 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

 ∆ = 

### 1 

 2 bc^ sin^ A 


© UCLES 2019 0606/22/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**1** Given that ln 

 y sin x 

 x 

= 2 , find an expression for (^) d d _x y_ 

. [4] 

**2** Find the values of _k_ for which the equation ( _k_ 1 ) _x_^2 + _kx_ _k_ = 0 has real and distinct roots. [4] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/22/M/J/19 

**3 (i)** Given that _x_ 2 is a factor of _ax_^3 12 _x_^2 + 5 _x_ + 6 , use the factor theorem to show that _a_ = 4. [2] 

 (ii) Showing all your working, factorise 4 x^3 12 x^2 + 5 x + 6 and hence solve 4 x^3 12 x^2 + 5 x + 6 = 0. [4] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/22/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**4** A circle has diameter _x_ which is increasing at a constant rate of 0 01. cm s-^1. Find the exact rate of change of the area of the circle when _x_ = 6 cm. [5] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/22/M/J/19 

**5 (i)** Express 5 _x_^2 15 _x_ + 1 in the form _p x q r_ 

 2  + j + , where p , q and r are constants. [3] 

 (ii) Hence state the least value of x^2 3 x + 0 2. and the value of x at which this occurs. [2] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/22/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**6 (a)** State the order of the matrix 

### 0 

### 5 

### 1 

### 8 

### 4 

### 1 

### 8 

### 6 

 e o. [1] 

 (b) A 

### 2 

### 1 

### 4 

### 3 

### = 

### 

### 

 e o 

 (i) Find A -^1. [2] 

 (ii) Hence, given that ABA = I , find the matrix B. [3] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/22/M/J/19 

**7 (a)** Solve lg ( _x_^2 3 ) = 0. [2] 

**(b) (i)** Show that, for _a_ 2 0 , (^) ln ln ln _a a_ sin^ (^2 _x_^ +^5 )^ + b l _a_^1 may be written as sin ( 2 _x_ + 5 )+ _k_ , where _k_ is an integer. [3] **(ii)** Hence find (^) ln ln ln _a_ d _a_ (^) _a x_ c sin^ (^2 _x_^ +^5 )^ +^1 e d dd b l 

. [3] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/22/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**8 (a)** In the binomial expansion of _a_ (^) 2 _x_ 6 b l , the coefficient of _x_^3 is 120 times the coefficient of _x_^5. Find the possible values of the constant _a_. [4] **(b) (i)** Expand (^) ( 1 + 2 _x_ )^20 in ascending powers of _x_ , as far as the term in _x_^3. Simplify each term. [2] **(ii)** Use your expansion to show that the value of 0.98^20 is 0.67 to 2 decimal places. [2] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/22/M/J/19 

**9 (a)** Solve 6 sin 2 _x_^ 13 cos _x_ = 1 for 0 ° G _x_ G 360 °. [4] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/22/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

 (b) (i) Show that, for r 2 1 y 1 r 2 , tan 

 tan y 

 y 1 

### 4 

 + 2 can be written in the form^ a^ sin y ,^ where^ a^ is an integer. [3] 

 (ii) Hence solve tan 

 tan y 

 y 1 

### 4 

### 2 3 0 

### + 

 + = for 2 r 1 y 12 rradians. [1] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/22/M/J/19 

**10 (a)** Find the unit vector in the direction of 5 **i** 15 **j**. [2] 

 (b) The position vectors of points A and B relative to an origin O are 

### 3 

### 5 

e o (^) and 12 7 e o (^) respectively. The point _C_ lies on _AB_ such that _AC_ : _CB_ is 2 : 1. **(i)** Find the position vector of _C_ relative to _O_. [3] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/22/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

 The point D lies on OB such that OD : OB is 1 : m and . 

### DC 

### 6 

### 1 25 

 = e^ o. 

 (ii) Find the value of m. [3] 


 © UCLES 2019 0606/22/M/J/19 

**11** The velocity, _v_ m s−^1 , of a particle travelling in a straight line, _t_ seconds after passing through a fixed 

 point O , is given by v t 1 

### 4 

= (^3) ` (^) + j 

### . 

 (i) Explain why the direction of motion of the particle never changes. [1] 

 (ii) Showing all your working, find the acceleration of the particle when t = 5. [3] 

 (iii) Find an expression for the displacement of the particle from O after t seconds. [3] 

 (iv) Find the distance travelled by the particle in the fourth second. [2] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/22/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**12 (a)** The functions f and g are defined by f ( ) _x_ = 5 _x_ 2 for _x_ 2 1 , g ( ) _x_ = 4 _x_ 2 9 for _x_ 2 0. 

 (i) State the range of g. [1] 

 (ii) Find the domain of gf. [1] 

 (iii) Showing all your working, find the exact solutions of gf ( ) x = 4. [3] 

 Question 12(b) is printed on the next page. 


© UCLES 2019 0606/22/M/J/19 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. 

 (b) The function h is defined by h ( ) x = x^2 1 for x G1. 

 (i) State the geometrical relationship between the graphs of y = h( ) x and y = h-^1 ( ) x. [1] 

 (ii) Find an expression for h -^1 ( ) x. [3] 


