 This document consists of 16 printed pages. 

 DC (KN/TP) 165276/2 © UCLES 2019 [Turn over 

* 6 9 3 8 3 3 3 3 6 1 * 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/13 Paper 1 May/June 2019 2 hours Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all the questions. Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 


© UCLES 2019 0606/13/M/J/19 

## Mathematical Formulae 

## 1. ALGEBRA 

## Quadratic Equation 

## For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

## x 

## a 

## b b ac 

## 2 

## = -^!^2 -^4 

## Binomial Theorem 

( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( 

## n 

# 1 ) a 

_n_ –1 (^) _b_ + 

# ( 

## n 

# 2 ) a 

_n_ –2 (^) _b_ (^2) + … + 

# ( 

## n 

# r ) a 

_n_ – _r_ (^) _br_ (^) + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( 

## n 

# r ) =^ 

## n! 

## ( n – r )! r! 

## 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

## Identities 

## sin^2 A + cos^2 A = 1 

## sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A 

## cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

## Formulae for ∆ ABC 

 a 

## sin A =^ 

 b 

## sin B =^ 

 c 

## sin C 

## a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

## ∆ = 

### 1 

## 2 bc^ sin^ A 


© UCLES 2019 0606/13/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**1** Describe, using set notation, the relationship between the sets shown in each of the Venn diagrams below. 

### A X Y 

### Z 

### B 

### .......................................... .......................................... 

###   

### [3] 

**2** Given that _p q r_ 

 qr p q r 

_p_ (^) 1 2^ _a_^ _b_^ _c_ 2 31 

### = 

- ` j , find the value of each of the constants _a_ , _b_ and _c_. [3] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/13/M/J/19 

**3** Show that the line _y_ = _mx_ + 4 will touch or intersect the curve _y_ = _x_^2 + 3 _x_ + _m_ for all values of _m_. 

## [4] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/13/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**4** It is given that 

 ln( ) 

_y_ (^) _x x_ 1 

### 2 3 5 

= (^) 

### + 

 for x 2 1. 

 (i) Find the value of x 

 y d 

 d when x = 2. You must show all your working. [4] 

## (ii) Find the approximate change in y as x increases from 2 to 2 + p , where p is small. [1] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/13/M/J/19 

**5 (i)** On the axes below, sketch the graph of _y_ = 3 _x_^2 14 _x_ 5 , showing the coordinates of the points where the graph meets the coordinate axes. 

 y 

 –1 0 6^ x 

### [4] 

 (ii) Find the exact value of k such that 3 x^2 14 x 5 = k has 3 solutions only. [3] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/13/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**6 (a) (i)** Show that sec _i_ (^) cosectan^ _i i_^ = cos _i_. [3] **(ii)** Solve sec 2 _i_ (^) cosectan^22^ _ii_ = 23 for 0 c G _i_ G 180 c. [3] **(b)** Solve 2 sin^2 b _z_ + r 3 l = 1 for 0 1 _z_ 12 rradians. [4] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/13/M/J/19 

**7 Do not use a calculator in this question.** In this question, all lengths are in centimetres. 

### A 

### B C 

### 2 5 1 

### 2+ 2 5 

 The diagram shows the triangle ABC such that AB = 2 5 1 , BC = 2 + 5 and angle ABC = 90 c. 

 (i) Find the exact length of AC. [3] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/13/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

 (ii) Find tan ACB , giving your answer in the form p + q r , where p , q and r are integers. [3] 

## (iii) Hence find sec 2 ACB , giving your answer in the form s + t u where s , t and u are integers. [2] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/13/M/J/19 

**8** f | _x_ 7 e 3 _x_ for _x_ dR g | _x_ 72 _x_ 2 + 1 for _x_ H 0 

 (i) Write down the range of g. [1] 

 (ii) Show that f -^1 g( 62 ) =ln 5. [3] 

 (iii) Solve f l^ ( ) x = 6 gll^ ( ) x , giving your answer in the form ln a , where a is an integer. [3] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/13/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

 (iv) On the axes below, sketch the graph of y = gand the graph of y = g-^1 , showing the points where the graphs meet the coordinate axes. 

 y 

 O x 

### [3] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/13/M/J/19 

**9 (a)** Jack has won 7 trophies for sport and wants to arrange them on a shelf. He has 2 trophies for cricket, 4 trophies for football and 1 trophy for swimming. Find the number of different arrangements if 

 (i) there are no restrictions, [1] 

 (ii) the football trophies are to be kept together, [3] 

 (iii) the football trophies are to be kept together and the cricket trophies are to be kept together. [3] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/13/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

 (b) A team of 8 players is to be chosen from 6 girls and 8 boys. Find the number of different ways the team may be chosen if 

 (i) there are no restrictions, [1] 

 (ii) all the girls are in the team, [1] 

 (iii) at least 1 girl is in the team. [2] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/13/M/J/19 

**10** A curve is such that _x_ 

 y 2 x 3 d 

 d 2 

 2 2 

 1 = + 

- ` j. The curve has a gradient of 5 at the point where _x_ = 3 and passes 

 through the point e 21 , 31 o. 

 (i) Find the equation of the curve. [7] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/13/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

 (ii) Find the equation of the normal to the curve at the point where x = 3 , giving your answer in the form ax + by + c = 0 , where a , b and c are integers. [4] 

## Question 11 is printed on the next page. 


© UCLES 2019 0606/13/M/J/19 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. 

**11** A pilot wishes to fly his plane from a point _A_ to a point _B_. The bearing of _B_ from _A_ is 050°. A wind is blowing from the north at a speed of 120 km h–1. The plane can fly at 600 km h–1^ in still air. 

 (i) Find the bearing on which the pilot must fly his plane in order to reach B. [4] 

 (ii) Given that the distance from A to B is 2500 km, find the time taken to fly from A to B. [4] 


