 Cambridge Assessment International Education Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

* 8 1 0 9 1 2 9 2 5 4 * 

 This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. 

 DC (NF/TP) 165272/1 © UCLES 2019 [Turn over 

##### ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/21 

 Paper 2 May/June 2019 2 hours Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all the questions. Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 


© UCLES 2019 0606/21/M/J/19 

 Mathematical Formulae 

##### 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

 x b b ac a 

##### = 

##### − 2 − 4 

##### 2 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( _n_ 

# 1 ) a 

_n_ –1 (^) _b_ + 

# ( 

 n 

# 2 ) a 

_n_ –2 (^) _b_ (^2) + … + 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) a 

_n_ – _r_ (^) _br_ (^) + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( _n_ 

# r ) =^ 

 n! ( n – r )! r! 

##### 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ 

 sin^2 A + cos^2 A = 1 

#### sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A 

#### cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC_ 

 a sin A =^ 

 b sin B =^ 

 c sin C 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

 ∆ = 

##### 1 

 2 bc^ sin^ A 


© UCLES 2019 0606/21/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

#### 1 Find the values of x for which x (6 x + 7) H 20. [3] 

**2** Two variables _x_ and _y_ are such that _y_ ln _x_ 

 x 

#### = 3 for x 2 0. 

**(i)** Show that (^) _x_ ln _y x_ 1 3 _x_ d d = (^4) (^). [3] **(ii)** Hence find the approximate change in _y_ as _x_ increases from e to e + _h_ , where _h_ is small. [2] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/21/M/J/19 

**3 (i)** Sketch the graph of _y_ = 5 _x_ 3 on the axes below, showing the coordinates of the points where the graph meets the coordinate axes. 

 y 

 O x 

##### [3] 

 (ii) Solve the equation 5 x 3 = 2 x. [3] 

**4 Without using a calculator** , express 5 1 

##### 5 3 

 2 

 + 

` (^) j in the form _p_ 5 + _q_ , where _p_ and _q_ are integers. [4] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/21/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

##### 5 

 v ms–1 

_O_ (^) 4 _t_ s 

##### 10 

 k k + 6 

 The velocity-time graph represents the motion of a particle travelling in a straight line. 

 (i) Find the acceleration during the last 6 seconds of the motion. [1] 

 (ii) The particle travels with constant velocity for 23 seconds. Find the value of k. [1] 

 (iii) Using your answer to part (ii) , find the total distance travelled by the particle. [3] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/21/M/J/19 

**6 (a)** 

 x x 

 x x 

##### A 

##### 3 

##### 2 3 

##### = 

##### + 

##### 

 e o 

 Given that A does not have an inverse, find the exact values of x. [3] 

 (b) B 

##### 0 

##### 4 

##### 5 

##### 3 

##### 1 

##### 2 

### = -f p and C 

##### 0 

##### 3 

##### 1 

##### 4 

##### 2 

##### 5 

##### = 

##### 

 e o 

 (i) Write down the order of matrix B. [1] 

 (ii) The matrix BC 

##### 9 

##### 3 

##### 6 

##### 12 

##### 8 

##### 3 

##### 15 

##### 3 

##### 20 

##### = 

##### 

##### 

##### 

### f p. Explain why^ CB^!^ BC.^ [2] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/21/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**7** The variables _x_ , _y_ and _u_ are such that _y_ = tan _u_ and _x_ = _u_^3 + 1. 

 (i) State the rate of change of y with respect to u. [1] 

 (ii) Hence find the rate of change of y with respect to x , giving your answer in terms of x. [4] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/21/M/J/19 

##### 8 

##### 9 

 2 rrad 

##### B 

##### D^ C 

##### E 

##### A 

 8 cm 

 The diagram shows a right-angled triangle ABC with AB = 8 cm and angle ABC = 2 rradians. The points D and E lie on AC and BC respectively. BAD and ECD are sectors of the circles with centres A and C respectively. Angle BAD = 29 rradians. 

 (i) Find the area of the shaded region. [6] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/21/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

 (ii) Find the perimeter of the shaded region. [3] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/21/M/J/19 

**9 (a)** Eleven different television sets are to be displayed in a line in a large shop. 

 (i) Find the number of different ways the televisions can be arranged. [1] 

 Of these television sets, 6 are made by company A and 5 are made by company B. 

 (ii) Find the number of different ways the televisions can be arranged so that no two sets made by company A are next to each other. [2] 

 (b) A group of people is to be selected from 5 women and 3 men. 

 (i) Calculate the number of different groups of 4 people that have exactly 3 women. [2] 

 (ii) Calculate the number of different groups of at most 4 people where the number of women is the same as the number of men. [2] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/21/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**10 Solutions to this question by accurate drawing will not be accepted.** 

 The points A and B have coordinates ( p , 3) and (1, 4) respectively and the line L has equation 3 x + y = 2. 

 (i) Given that the gradient of AB is 31 , find the value of p. [2] 

 (ii) Show that L is the perpendicular bisector of AB. [3] 

 (iii) Given that C q  , 10 j lies on L , find the value of q. [1] 

 (iv) Find the area of triangle ABC. [2] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/21/M/J/19 

**11 (a) (i)** Show that cosecsin^^ _i_^^ _i_^ cot _i_ = (^1) + cos^1 _i_. [4] **(ii)** Hence solve cosecsin^ _i_^ _i_^ cot _i_ = 25 for 180 ° 1 _i_ 1360 °. [2] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/21/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

 (b) Solve tan 3 z 4 j =21 for 0 G z Gr 2 radians. [3] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/21/M/J/19 

**12 (a)** Given that 

 a e 2 x d x 50 0 

## y = , find the exact value of^ a.^ You must show all your working.^ [4] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/21/M/J/19 

**(b)** A curve is such that (^) _x_ cos _y_ d^3 2 5 _x_ d = -. The curve passes through the point b 5 r ,^85 rl. **(i)** Find the equation of the curve. [4] **(ii)** Find (^) y _y x_ d and hence evaluate r r^ _y x_ d 2 

## y.^ [5] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/21/M/J/19 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. 

##### BLANK PAGE 


