 This document consists of 16 printed pages. 

 DC (CE/SW) 172295/2 © UCLES 2019 [Turn over 

* 3 0 6 0 2 5 3 8 4 8 * 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/11 Paper 1 October/November 2019 2 hours Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all the questions. Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/11/O/N/19** 

 Mathematical Formulae 

## 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

 x b^ 2 ba^^4 ac 

## !^2 

## = -^ -^. 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( _n_ 

# 1 ) a 

_n_ –1 (^) _b_ + 

# ( 

 n 

# 2 ) a 

_n_ –2 (^) _b_ (^2) + … + 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) a 

_n_ – _r_ (^) _br_ (^) + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( _n_ 

# r ) =^ 

 n! ( n – r )! r! 

## . 

## 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ 

 sin 2 A + cos^2 A = 1 

 sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A 

 cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC_ 

 a sin A =^ 

 b sin B =^ 

 c sin C 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

 ∆ = 1 2 

 bc sin A 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/11/O/N/19 [Turn over** 

**1** Using set notation, describe the regions shaded on the Venn diagrams below. 

##   

## A B 

## X Y 

## Z 

## .......................................................................... .......................................................................... [2] 

**2** Find the values of _k_ for which the line _y_ = _kx_ 3 and the curve _y_ = 2 _x_^2 + 3 _x_ + _k_ do not intersect. [5] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/11/O/N/19** 

**3** Given that 7 _x_^ # 49 _y_ = 1 and 5 5 _x_^125 251 

 y 3 

 2 # = , calculate the value of x and of y. [5] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/11/O/N/19 [Turn over** 

**4** It is given that 

 ln( ) 

_y_ (^) _x x_ 2 3 

## 4 2 1 

= (^) 

## + 

## . 

 (i) Find x 

 y d 

 d 

. [3] 

 (ii) Find the approximate change in y as x increases from 2 to 2 + h , where h is small. [2] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/11/O/N/19** 

**5** f ( ) _x_ = 3 e 2 _x_ + 1 for _x_ dR 

 g ( ) x = x + 1 for x dR 

 (i) Write down the range of f and of g. [2] 

 (ii) Evaluate fg 2 ( ) 0. [2] 

 (iii) On the axes below, sketch the graphs of y = f( ) x and y = f -^1 ( ) x , stating the coordinates of the points where the graphs meet the coordinate axes. [3] 

 y 

 O x 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/11/O/N/19 [Turn over** 

**6** Find the equation of the normal to the curve _y_ = 8 _x_ + 5 at the point where _x_ = 21 , giving your answer in the form _ax_ + _by_ + _c_ = 0 ,where _a_ , _b_ and _c_ are integers. [5] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/11/O/N/19** 

**7** When lg _y_ is plotted against _x_ , a straight line graph passing through the points (2.2, 3.6) and (3.4, 6) is obtained. 

 (i) Given that y = Ab x ,find the value of each of the constants A and b. [5] 

 (ii) Find x when y = 900. [2] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/11/O/N/19 [Turn over** 

**8 Do not use a calculator in this question.** 

 In this question, all lengths are in centimetres. 

## 7 + 5 

## 11 + 2 5 

## A^4 +^35 B 

## D C 

 The diagram shows the trapezium ABCD in which angle ADC is 90° and AB is parallel to DC. It is given that AB = 4 + 3 5 , DC = 11 + 2 5 and AD = 7 + 5. 

 (i) Find the perimeter of the trapezium, giving your answer in simplest surd form. [3] 

 (ii) Find the area of the trapezium, giving your answer in simplest surd form. [3] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/11/O/N/19** 

## 9 

## A 

## D 

## B 

## O 

 15 cm 

 10 cm 

 10 cm C 

 The diagram shows a circle with centre O and radius 10 cm. The points A , B , C and D lie on the circle such that the chord AB = 15 cm and the chord CD = 10 cm. The chord AB is parallel to the chord DC. 

 (i) Show that the angle AOB is 1.70 radians correct to 2 decimal places. [2] 

 (ii) Find the perimeter of the shaded region. [4] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/11/O/N/19 [Turn over** 

 (iii) Find the area of the shaded region. [4] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/11/O/N/19** 

## 10 

 y 

 O x 

 y = 2 + cos 3 x 

 y = 1.5 

 The diagram shows part of the graph of y = 2 + cos 3 x and the straight line y = 1 5. .Find the exact area of the shaded region bounded by the curve and the straight line. You must show all your working. [9] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/11/O/N/19 [Turn over** 

 Continuation of working space for Question 10 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/11/O/N/19** 

**11 (a)** Jess wants to arrange 9 different books on a shelf. There are 4 mathematics books, 3 physics books and 2 chemistry books. Find the number of different possible arrangements of the books if 

 (i) there are no restrictions, [1] 

 (ii) a chemistry book is at each end of the shelf, [2] 

 (iii) all the mathematics books are kept together and all the physics books are kept together. [3] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/11/O/N/19 [Turn over** 

 (b) A quiz team of 6 children is to be chosen from a class of 8 boys and 10 girls. Find the number of ways of choosing the team if 

 (i) there are no restrictions, [1] 

 (ii) there are more boys than girls in the team. [4] 

 Question 12 is printed on the next page. 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/11/O/N/19** 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. 

**12** A curve is such that sin _x_ 

 y 2 x 3 d 

 d 2 

 2 = b +rl. Given that the curve has a gradient of 5 at the point , 3 3 br 5 rl, find the equation of the curve. [8] 


