 This document consists of 7 printed pages. 

© UCLES 2019 **[Turn over** 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

**ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/23** 

Paper 2 **October/November 2019** 

MARK SCHEME 

Maximum Mark: 80 

 Published 

This mark scheme is published as an aid to teachers and candidates, to indicate the requirements of the examination. It shows the basis on which Examiners were instructed to award marks. It does not indicate the details of the discussions that took place at an Examiners’ meeting before marking began, which would have considered the acceptability of alternative answers. 

Mark schemes should be read in conjunction with the question paper and the Principal Examiner Report for Teachers. 

Cambridge International will not enter into discussions about these mark schemes. 

Cambridge International is publishing the mark schemes for the October/November 2019 series for most Cambridge IGCSE™, Cambridge International A and AS Level components and some Cambridge O Level components. 


###### PUBLISHED 

###### 2019 

 Generic Marking Principles 

These general marking principles must be applied by all examiners when marking candidate answers. They should be applied alongside the specific content of the mark scheme or generic level descriptors for a question. Each question paper and mark scheme will also comply with these marking principles. 

###### GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 1: 

 Marks must be awarded in line with: 

- the specific content of the mark scheme or the generic level descriptors for the question 

- the specific skills defined in the mark scheme or in the generic level descriptors for the question 

- the standard of response required by a candidate as exemplified by the standardisation scripts. 

 GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 2: 

 Marks awarded are always whole marks (not half marks, or other fractions). 

 GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 3: 

 Marks must be awarded positively : 

- marks are awarded for correct/valid answers, as defined in the mark scheme. However, credit     is given for valid answers which go beyond the scope of the syllabus and mark scheme,     referring to your Team Leader as appropriate 

- marks are awarded when candidates clearly demonstrate what they know and can do 

- marks are not deducted for errors 

- marks are not deducted for omissions 

- answers should only be judged on the quality of spelling, punctuation and grammar when these     features are specifically assessed by the question as indicated by the mark scheme. The     meaning, however, should be unambiguous. 

 GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 4: 

 Rules must be applied consistently e.g. in situations where candidates have not followed instructions or in the application of generic level descriptors. 

 GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 5: 

 Marks should be awarded using the full range of marks defined in the mark scheme for the question (however; the use of the full mark range may be limited according to the quality of the candidate responses seen). 

 GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 6: 

 Marks awarded are based solely on the requirements as defined in the mark scheme. Marks should not be awarded with grade thresholds or grade descriptors in mind. 


###### PUBLISHED 

###### 2019 

###### MARK SCHEME NOTES 

The following notes are intended to aid interpretation of mark schemes in general, but individual mark schemes may include marks awarded for specific reasons outside the scope of these notes. 

**Types of mark** 

M Method marks, awarded for a valid method applied to the problem. 

A Accuracy mark, awarded for a correct answer or intermediate step correctly obtained. For accuracy marks to be given, the associated Method mark must be earned or implied. 

B Mark for a correct result or statement independent of Method marks. 

When a part of a question has two or more ‘method’ steps, the M marks are in principle independent unless the scheme specifically says otherwise; and similarly where there are several B marks allocated. The notation ‘ **dep** ’ is used to indicate that a particular M or B mark is dependent on an earlier mark in the scheme. 

**Abbreviations** 

awrt answers which round to cao correct answer only dep dependent FT follow through after error isw ignore subsequent working nfww not from wrong working oe or equivalent rot rounded or truncated SC Special Case soi seen or implied 


###### PUBLISHED 

###### 2019 

**Question Answer Marks Guidance** 

 1 x = 1 B1 

 –3 x – 2 = x + 4 oe M1 

 x = –1.5 oe A1 

2(i) (^) sin^1 cossin 1 cos _x x x_ 

###### − 

###### − 

 M1 express in terms of sin x^ and cos x 

#### ( ) 

#### ( ) 

 1 cos sin 1 cos 

 x x 

###### − 

###### − 

 A1 rewrite not as a fraction within a fraction 

###### 1 

 cosec sin 

 x x 

###### = 

 A1 correct completion answer given 

2(ii) (^1) sin 30 2 

######   

######  =^  =^ ° 

######   

 x x 

###### B1 

 x = 150º nfww B1 no extra answers 

 3 (1 + ax ) 5 = 1+ 5 ax + 10 a^2 x^2 + 10 a^3 x^3 soi B1 4 terms not n C r notation 

 [2] + (10 a + b ) x + (5 ab + 20 a^2 ) x^2 M1 obtain expansion with 2 terms in x , 2 terms in x^2 

 equate terms in x and x^2 to give two equations in a and b each consisting of three terms 

###### M1 

 10 a + b = 32 5 ab + 20 a^2 = 210 

 A1 correct equations imply previous two M marks 

 eliminate b M1 

obtain 3 _a_^2 – 16 _a_ + 21 = 0 correctly (^) **A1 answer given** _a_ = 3 and _b_ = 2 **B1** _c_ = 720 only **B1** no additional answers 4(i) _y_ = 2( _x_ – 1) 2 – 9 **B3** _a_ = 2, _b_ = 1, _c_ = –9 in correct form. **B1** for each 4(ii) minimum _their_ –9 **B1 FT** from _their_ correct form, with _a_ > 0 when _x_ = _their_ 1 **B1 FT** from _their_ correct form, with _a_ > 0 


###### PUBLISHED 

###### 2019 

**Question Answer Marks Guidance** 

4(iii) (^) _x_ = _p_ or _p_ = _x_^2 soi **B1** 

## ( ) 

# ( ) 

###### 9 

###### 1 

###### 2 

###### 9 

 or 1 oe 2 

###### − = 

###### − = 

 x 

 p 

###### M1 

## ( ) 

# ( ) 

###### − 

###### − = 

###### − 

###### − = 

 c x b a c p b a using their values of a , b , c from (i) 

 p = 9.74 A1 completion not involving use of quadratic formula 

 5(a) 

tan (^) ( ) 3 4  π  −^ =^ ±   _y_ 

###### M1 ± 1.73… 

###### 2 

 or 4 3 3 

 π π π y − = 

 A1 1.04(7…) or 2.09(4…) 

###### 7 

 or 1.83 12 

 π y = 

###### A1 

###### 11 

 or 2.88 12 

 π y = 

###### A1 

 5(b) correctly rewrite equation in terms of sin z and cos z 

###### M1 

 use sin 2 z = 1 – cos^2 z M1 appropriate use of Pythagorean identity for forming an equation in one trig ratio 

 6cos^2 z – 7cos z + 1 = 0 oe A1 

 (6cos z – 1) (cos z – 1) = 0 M1 solve three term quadratic in cos z 

 80.4º A1 

 279.6º A1 

 6(i) 

## [ ] 

###### 3 3 

 tan 3 3 

###### + 

###### = 

###### − 

###### ACB 

###### B1 

 rationalise with 3 + 3 M1 

 simplify showing at least 3 terms in numerator to 2 + 3 

###### A1 

 6(ii) 

( ) (^) ( ) ( ) 2 2 2 _AC_ = 3 + 3 + 3 − 3 oe **M1** Pythagoras at least 4 terms 12 + 6 3 + 12 − 6 3 **A1** 


###### PUBLISHED 

###### 2019 

**Question Answer Marks Guidance** 

###### AC = 2 6 A1 

 7(i) evidence of differentiation (3 x + 2) –3^ M1 

 –12(3 x + 2)–3^ × 3 A1 may use PR or QR on fraction part 

 +1 B1 

 set their d d 

 y x 

###### = 0 

 M1 1 –36(3 x + 2)–3^ = 0 

 x = 0.43 nfww A1 

 y = 0.98 only A1 

7(ii) (^2) 3 _x_ 2 

###### − 

###### + 

 oe 

###### B1 

(^12) 2 _x_ 

###### B1 

###### 2 2 

###### 2 

###### 6 2 2 

######  −^   −  

######  +^  −  

######  +    

 M1 insert correct limits into their two term integral and subtract two non-zero terms in correct order 

 2.75 nfww A1 2.75 following B1 B1implies M1 

8(i) _p_ = –4 (^) **B1** 8(ii) ( _x_ – 2) ( _x_ – 3) ( _x_ + 4) **M1 FT** ( _x_ – 2) ( _x_ –3) ( _x_ – _p_ ) ( _x_^2 – 5 _x_ + 6) ( _x_ + 4) **A1 FT** ( _x_^2 – 5 _x_ + 6) ( _x_ – _p_ ) multiply out two factors correctly obtain _a_ = –1 _x_^3 – _x_^2 – 14 _x_ + 24 **A1 answer given** _b_ = –14 stated **B1** 8(iii) (^) d (^2) 3 2 14 d _y x x x_ 

###### = − − 

 B1 FT their numerical b 3 x^2 – 2 x + b 

 8(iv) set their 

 d d 

 y x 

 equal to 2 

 M1 FT their numerical b 

 x = 2 A1 

 y = 40 only A1 no additional answers 

 8(v) y – 40 = 2( x + 2) ( y = 2 x + 44) B1 

9(i) (^) _AD_ = 2 **a** + **b** 

###### JJJG 

###### B1 


###### PUBLISHED 

###### 2019 

**Question Answer Marks Guidance** 

#### OX = a + λ ( 2 a + b ) 

###### JJJG 

###### B1 

9(ii) (^) _BC_ = 3 **a** − 2 **b** 

###### JJJG 

###### B1 

#### OX = 2 b + μ ( 3 a − 2 b ) 

###### JJJG 

###### B1 

9(iii) (^) _OX_^ JJJG^ = _OX_ JJJG^ and equate for **a** or **b M1** 

##### 1 + 2 λ = 3 μ and λ = 2 − 2 μ A1 

##### solve correct equations for λ or μ M1 

###### 4 

###### 7 

 λ = and 5 7 

 μ = 

###### A1 

9(iv) (^4) 3 or 4 : 3 **B1 FT** λ/(1 – _λ_ ) 0 < _λ_ < 1 10(i) (^) gf (^) ( _x_ (^) ) = e2 ln 3 ( (^^ _x_ +^2 ))− 4 **B1** _their_ gf = 5 **M1** use ln _a p_^ = _p_ ln _a_ or eln _a_^ = _a_ or lne _a_^ = _a_ **B1** correct use of log/exponential relationship seen anywhere 3 _x_ + 2 = 3 or (3 _x_ + 2) 2 = 9 **A1** 3 may take the form of e0.5ln9 9 may take the form of eln9 1 3 _x_ = only 

###### A1 

10(ii) (^) e 2 3 _y x_ 

###### − 

###### = 

 M1 find x in terms of y 

## ( 1 (^ ) ) 

 e 2 f or 3 

 x − x y 

###### − 

###### = = 

 A1 interchange x and y correct completion 

10(iii) (^) e (^2 2) e 4 3 _x_ − (^) = _x_ − **M1**^ _their_ (^) ( ) ( ) f -1 _x_ =g _x_ 3e^2 _x_^ − e _x_ − (^10) ( = (^0) ) **A1**^ obtain quadratic in e _x_ must be arranged as a three term quadratic in order shown 

### ( 3e^5 )(^ e^2 ) (^0 ) 

_x_ (^) + _x_ − = **M1** (^) solve for e _x x_ = ln2 or 0.693only **A1** 


