 This document consists of 9 printed pages. 

© UCLES 2019 **[Turn over** 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

**ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/13** 

Paper 1 **October/November 2019** 

MARK SCHEME 

Maximum Mark: 80 

 Published 

This mark scheme is published as an aid to teachers and candidates, to indicate the requirements of the examination. It shows the basis on which Examiners were instructed to award marks. It does not indicate the details of the discussions that took place at an Examiners’ meeting before marking began, which would have considered the acceptability of alternative answers. 

Mark schemes should be read in conjunction with the question paper and the Principal Examiner Report for Teachers. 

Cambridge International will not enter into discussions about these mark schemes. 

Cambridge International is publishing the mark schemes for the October/November 2019 series for most Cambridge IGCSE™, Cambridge International A and AS Level components and some Cambridge O Level components. 


 PUBLISHED 2019 

 Generic Marking Principles 

These general marking principles must be applied by all examiners when marking candidate answers. They should be applied alongside the specific content of the mark scheme or generic level descriptors for a question. Each question paper and mark scheme will also comply with these marking principles. 

 GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 1: 

 Marks must be awarded in line with: 

- the specific content of the mark scheme or the generic level descriptors for the question 

- the specific skills defined in the mark scheme or in the generic level descriptors for the question 

- the standard of response required by a candidate as exemplified by the standardisation scripts. 

 GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 2: 

 Marks awarded are always whole marks (not half marks, or other fractions). 

 GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 3: 

 Marks must be awarded positively : 

- marks are awarded for correct/valid answers, as defined in the mark scheme. However, credit     is given for valid answers which go beyond the scope of the syllabus and mark scheme,     referring to your Team Leader as appropriate 

- marks are awarded when candidates clearly demonstrate what they know and can do 

- marks are not deducted for errors 

- marks are not deducted for omissions 

- answers should only be judged on the quality of spelling, punctuation and grammar when these     features are specifically assessed by the question as indicated by the mark scheme. The     meaning, however, should be unambiguous. 

 GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 4: 

 Rules must be applied consistently e.g. in situations where candidates have not followed instructions or in the application of generic level descriptors. 

 GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 5: 

 Marks should be awarded using the full range of marks defined in the mark scheme for the question (however; the use of the full mark range may be limited according to the quality of the candidate responses seen). 

 GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 6: 

 Marks awarded are based solely on the requirements as defined in the mark scheme. Marks should not be awarded with grade thresholds or grade descriptors in mind. 


 PUBLISHED 2019 

 MARK SCHEME NOTES 

The following notes are intended to aid interpretation of mark schemes in general, but individual mark schemes may include marks awarded for specific reasons outside the scope of these notes. 

**Types of mark** 

M Method marks, awarded for a valid method applied to the problem. 

A Accuracy mark, awarded for a correct answer or intermediate step correctly obtained. For accuracy marks to be given, the associated Method mark must be earned or implied. 

B Mark for a correct result or statement independent of Method marks. 

When a part of a question has two or more ‘method’ steps, the M marks are in principle independent unless the scheme specifically says otherwise; and similarly where there are several B marks allocated. The notation ‘ **dep** ’ is used to indicate that a particular M or B mark is dependent on an earlier mark in the scheme. 

**Abbreviations** 

awrt answers which round to cao correct answer only dep dependent FT follow through after error isw ignore subsequent working nfww not from wrong working oe or equivalent rot rounded or truncated SC Special Case soi seen or implied 


 PUBLISHED 2019 

**Question Answer Marks Guidance** 

 1(i) M1 for a Venn diagram showing at least 4 correct ‘parts’ in terms of x 

 A1 for all 7 ‘parts’ correct in terms of x on a Venn diagram or in working. May be implied by a correct equation. 

 80 + 24 + x + 23 − x + 3 + x = 145 50 + 28 + x + 28 − x + 24 + x = 145 75 + 28 + x + 24 − x + 3 + x = 145 

50 + 80 + 75 − (^) ( 23 + 28 + (^24) ) + _x_ = 145 or equivalents **M1** for forming an equation in _x_ using sum of ‘parts’ = 145 or 

###### 50 + 80 + 75 − ( 23 + 28 + 24 )+ x = 145 

 Equations must be seen 

 x = 15 A1 from correct working only 

 1(ii) 43 B1ft for their x plus 28 

2(i) **B4** (^) **B1** for a maximum at (^) ( 0, 2) **B1** for minimums at _y_ = − 8 and no other minimums **B1** for starting at (^) ( −90 , 2 o )and finishing at (^) ( 90 , 2o ) **B1** for a fully correct curve with correct shape, particularly at end points, that has earned all three previous B marks. 2(ii) 5 **B1** 2(iii) 90 o **B1** 3(i) 

### ( ) 

 4 

d (^3 2 13) d − = − _y kx x x_ **M1** 

### ( ) 

 4 

d (^1 6 3 2 13) d 3 − = − × − _y x x x_ **A1** 3(ii) When d 3 3, d 8 = = − _y x x_ 3 or 0.217 8 − _p_ − _p_ **B1 FT** on _their_ d d _y x_ of the form (^) ( ) 4 _kx_ 3 _x_^2 − 1 −^3 


 PUBLISHED 2019 

**Question Answer Marks Guidance** 

 3(iii) When x = 3,^1 2 

 y = 

 B1 for 1 2 

 y = 

Normal: (^) ( ) 1 8 3 (^2 3) _y_ − = _x_ − **M1** Dep on M1in part(i). An equation of the normal using _their_ normal gradient, 3 and _their y_ **A1** allow unsimplified 4(i) (^11 2) 13 4 5  −^ −  − (^)    −  oe **B2 B1** for 1 13 − **B1** for 1 2 4 5  −^ −   (^) −    4(ii) (^11 2 12) 13 4 5 7     (^) −      1 26 13 13   = (^)     **M1** for pre-multiplication by _their_ inverse from (i) **M1** for correct method for matrix multiplication 2 1   = (^)     **A1** _x_ = 1.11 **B1** π 4 _y_ = or 0.785 **B1** 5(i) 

## ( ( )) 

d (^) ln 2 3 d _x_ + _x_ = 

### ( 2 ) 

 2 + 3 

 x x 

 B1 

### ( ) 

### ( ) 

### ( ) 

 2 2 2 

 d 2 3 2 ln 3 

d (^3) = + + + + _y x x x x x_ (^) _x_ **M1** for product rule **A1 FT** _their_ 

### ( 2 ) 

 2 + 3 

 x x 

5(ii) (^) ( 2 + 3 ln) ( 2 + (^3) ) = 2 + 2 ln (^) ( 2 + (^3) ) d _x x_ (^) ∫ _x x x x_ **M1** for using _their_ result from (i) for 

#### ( ) 

 2 x + kx ln x^2 + 3 

### ( ) 

### ( ) ( ) (^ ) 

 2 

 2 2 2 

 ln 3 d 

 1 3 ln 3 2 2 

 + 

 = + + − + 

#### ∫ x^ x^ x 

 x x x c 

 A1 


 PUBLISHED 2019 

**Question Answer Marks Guidance** 

6(i) (^) ln _y_ = ln _A_ + _x_^2 ln _b_ or lg _y_ = lg _A_ + _x_^2 lg _b_ **B1** May be implied by a table of values for _x_^2 and ln _y_ or lg _y_ or axes labelled ln _y_ or lg _y_ and^ _x_^2 **M1** for attempt to plot either ln _y_ or lg _y_ against _x_^2 using an evenly spaced scale on each axis. **A2 A2** All points on a correct line (for 1 ⩽ _x_^2 ⩽ 9) with axes correctly labelled **A1** One point not on the correct line or a correct line with axes not correctly labelled. **A0** Two or more points not on the correct line or one point not on the line and axes incorrect 6(ii) Gradient = ln _b_ or lg _b_ ln _b_ ≈ 0.7 or lg _b_ ≈0.3 leading to **M1** for a complete method using the gradient of _their_ straight-line graph of lg _y_ or ln _y_ against _x_^2 to obtain _b b_ = 2 (allow 1.6 – 2.4) **A1** from correct working Intercept = ln _A_ or lg _A_ ln _A_ ≈1.1 lg _A_ ≈0.5 leading to **M1** for a complete method using intercept of _their_ straight-line graph of lg _y_ or ln _y_ against _x_^2 to find _A A_ = 3 (allow 2.5 – 3.6) **A1** from correct working 6(iii) 

# ( ) 

 2 100 = 3 2 x 

 or ln100 = their 1.1 + their 0.7 x^2 or lg100 = their 0.5 + their 0.3 x^2 or reading from lg y = 2 to obtain x^2 or from ln y = 4.6 to obtain x^2 

**M1** (^) for a valid method to find _x_^2 Substitution methods should be using values of _A_ and _b_ in range leading to _x_ =2.25 (allow 2.0 – 2.7) **A1** for an answer in range from correct working 7(a)(i) 15 120 **B1** 7(a)(ii) 1680 **B1** 7(a)(iii) Method 1 Total = 2310 **B3** B1 1st digit is 7 or 9 1680 or 210 × 8 B1 1st digit is 8 630 or 210 × 3 7(a)(iii) Method 2 Total = 2310 **B3** B1 for 5th digit is 2,4 or 6 1890 or 210 × 9 B1 for 5th^ digit is 8 420 or 210 × 2 


 PUBLISHED 2019 

**Question Answer Marks Guidance** 

 7(b)(i) 3003 B1 

 7(b)(ii) 28 B1 

 7(b)(iii) Total 1419 B3 B1 Including husband and wife 495 B1 Excluding husband and wife 924 

8(a)(i) (^) log (^) _a a_ + 2log (^) _a y_ +log _ax_ **M1** (^) for log (^) _a a_ + log (^) _a x_ +log _ay_^2 **and** log 2 =2log _a y_^ _ay_ 1 + 2 _q_ + _p_ **A1** 8(a)(ii) (^) 3log (^) _a x_ − log (^) _a y_ −log _aa_ **M1** (^) for log (^) _a x_^3 − (log (^) _a a_ +log (^) _ay_ ) **and** log 3 =3log _a x_^ _ax_ 3 _p_ − _q_ − 1 or 3 _p_ − (^) ( _q_ + (^1) ) **A1** 8(a)(iii) (^1 1) + _p q_ **B1** 8(b) (^) _m_ − 3 _m_^2 + 4 = 0 4 3 _m_ = , (^) ( − (^1) ) 4 lg 3 lg3 _x_ = , 4 ln 3 ln3 _x_ = or lg 34 3 **M1** for obtaining a quadratic in _m_ or 3x **M1** Dep for attempt to solve quadratic and deal with 3 _x_^ correctly _x_ =0.262only **A1** 9(i) (^100) = 2 _r_ + 2 _r_ θ + 3 _r_ θ **M1** for addition of 2 _r_ and two arc lengths with at least one correct arc length 100 2 5 θ − = _r r_ or 20 2 5 − _r_ oe **A1** 9(ii) (^1 2 12) 9 4 2 2 _r_ θ− _r_ θ **M1** for subtraction of two sector areas with at least one sector area correct. 5 2 100 2 2 5  −      _r r r_ **A1** Must expand and simplify to obtain given answer 50 _r_ − _r_^2 9(iii) (^) d 50 2 d _A_ (^) = − _r r_ 0 = 50 − 2 _r_ leading to _r_ = 25 **M1** for differentiation and equating to zero and obtaining _r_ or for using completing the square 

##### ( ) 

(^2 2) − 25 − _r_ + 25 Max when _A_ = 625 **A1** 


 PUBLISHED 2019 

**Question Answer Marks Guidance** 

 9(iv) 

When (^) 10, d 30 d = = _A r r_ **B1** d 3 d 30 = _r t_ **M1** for d 3 d 30 = _r t their_ where _their_ 30 has been obtained from an evaluation of d d _A r_ at _r_ =10 d (^) 0.1 d _r_ = _t_ or 1 10 **A1** 9(v) 2 d 20 d θ = − _r r_ oe **B1** d 1 d 5 θ = − _r_ oe d 1 1 d 10 5 θ = × − _t_ oe **M1** for d d d d θ × _r their their t r_ with both evaluated at _r_ =10 d 1 or 0.02 d 50 θ = − − _t_ **A1** 10(a)(i) (^20 20) 5 − − ± **M1** for finding the gradient of the relevant part 8 **A1** 10(a)(ii) 7.5 **B1** 10(a)(iii) 

##### ( ) 

 1 1 5 7.5 20 2.5 20 2 2 

 + + ^ × ×      or 1 1 20 5+ 2.5 20 2.5 20 2 2 

 × ^ × × ^ + ^ × ×          oe 

 M1 for a correct expression for total area using their 7.5 

 150 A1 

10(b)(i) (^) _x_ = 3e^2 _t_ + _t_ + _c_ **M1** (^) for _k_ e^2 _t_ + _t_ (^) Condone omission of _c_ 0 = 3e 0 + 0 + _c_ When (^) _t_ = 0, _x_ = 0 so _c_ = − 3 **M1** Dep for substitution to find _c x_ = 3e^2 _t_ + _t_ − 3 **A1** 


 PUBLISHED 2019 

**Question Answer Marks Guidance** 

10(b)(ii) (^) d (^2) 12e d = _t v t_ so 12e^2 _t_^ = 24 **M1** (^) for _k_ e^2 _t_ equated to 24 2 _t_ =ln2 **M1**^ Dep for correct order of operations to obtain 2 _t_ 1 ln 2 2 _t_ = , ln 2 or 0.347 **A1** 


