 This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. 

 DC (SC/FC) 172297/1 © UCLES 2019 [Turn over 

* 9 4 2 8 0 1 3 3 1 3 * 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/13 Paper 1 October/November 2019 2 hours Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all the questions. Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/13/O/N/19** 

 Mathematical Formulae 

#### 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

_x_ (^) _a b b ac_ 2 

#### !^24 

#### = 

#### 

### . 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( _n_ 

# 1 ) a 

_n_ –1 (^) _b_ + 

# ( 

 n 

# 2 ) a 

_n_ –2 (^) _b_ (^2) + … + 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) a 

_n_ – _r_ (^) _br_ (^) + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( _n_ 

# r ) =^ 

 n! ( n – r )! r! 

#### . 

#### 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ 

 sin^2 A + cos^2 A = 1 sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC_ 

 a sin A =^ 

 b sin B =^ 

 c sin C 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

 ∆ = 1 2 

 bc sin A 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/13/O/N/19 [Turn over** 

**1** In a group of 145 students, the numbers studying mathematics, physics and chemistry are given below. All students study at least one of the three subjects. 

 x students study all 3 subjects 

 24 students study both mathematics and chemistry 

 23 students study both physics and chemistry 

 28 students study both mathematics and physics 

 50 students study chemistry 

 75 students study physics 

 80 students study mathematics 

 (i) Using the Venn diagram, find the value of x. [4] 

 (^) Mathematics Physics Chemistry **(ii)** Find the number of students who study mathematics only. [1] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/13/O/N/19** 

**2 (i)** On the axes below, sketch the graph of _y_ = 5 cos 4 _x_ 3 for 90 ° G _x_ G 90 °. 

 y 

 0 x 

#### 2 

#### 2 

#### 4 

#### 6 

#### 8 

#### 10 

#### 4 

#### 6 

#### 90° 45° 45° 90° 

#### [4] 

 (ii) Write down the amplitude of y. [1] 

 (iii) Write down the period of y. [1] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/13/O/N/19 [Turn over** 

**3 (i)** Differentiate _y_ 3 _x_ 2 1 3 

 1 = 

- 

` j (^) with respect to _x_. [2] **(ii)** Find the approximate change in _y_ as _x_ increases from 3 to 3 + _p_ ,where _p_ is small. [1] **(iii)** Find the equation of the normal to the curve _y_ 3 _x_ 2 1 3 1 = ` jat the point where _x_ = 3. [3] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/13/O/N/19** 

**4** It is given that **A**. 

#### 5 

#### 4 

#### 2 

#### 1 

#### = 

#### 

 e o 

 (i) Find A -^1. [2] 

 (ii) Hence find, in radians, the acute angles x and y such that 

 , . 

 tan tan tan tan 

 x y x y 

#### 5 2 12 

#### 4 7 

#### + = 

#### = [5] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/13/O/N/19 [Turn over** 

**5 (i)** Differentiate ( _x_^2 + 3 ) ln( _x_^2 + 3 ) with respect to _x_. [3] 

## (ii) Hence find y x ln( x^2 +3 d) x. [2] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/13/O/N/19** 

#### 6 

 x 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 

 y 6 14.3 48 228 1536 

 The table shows values of the variables x and y such that y Ab x , 

 2 = where A and b are constants. 

 (i) Draw a straight line graph to show that y Ab x. 

 2 = [4] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/13/O/N/19 [Turn over** 

 (ii) Use your graph to find the value of A and of b. [4] 

 (iii) Estimate the value of x when y = 100. [2] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/13/O/N/19** 

**7 (a)** A 5-digit code is to be chosen from the digits 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9. Each digit may be used once only in any 5-digit code. Find the number of different 5-digit codes that may be chosen if 

 (i) there are no restrictions, [1] 

 (ii) the code is divisible by 5, [1] 

 (iii) the code is even and greater than 70 000. [3] 

 (b) A team of 6 people is to be chosen from 8 men and 6 women. Find the number of different teams that may be chosen if 

 (i) there are no restrictions, [1] 

 (ii) there are no women in the team, [1] 

 (iii) there are a husband and wife who must not be separated. [3] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/13/O/N/19 [Turn over** 

**8 (a)** Given that log (^) _a x_ = _p_ and log (^) _a y_ = _q_ , find, in terms of _p_ and _q_ , **(i)** log (^) _aaxy_^2 ,^ [2] **(ii)** log (^) _a ayx_ 3 e o, [2] **(iii)** log (^) _x a_ + log _ya_. [1] **(b)** Using the substitution _m_ = 3 _x_ ,or otherwise, solve 3 _x_^ 3 1 +^2 _x_ + 4 = 0. [3] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/13/O/N/19** 

#### 9 

#### P Q 

#### R 

#### O 

#### S 

 i rad 

 2 r cm 

 r cm 

 The diagram shows a sector OPQ of the circle centre O , radius 3 r cm. The points S and R lie on OP and OQ respectively such that ORS is a sector of the circle centre O , radius 2 r cm. The angle POQ = i radians. The perimeter of the shaded region PQRS is 100 cm. 

 (i) Find i in terms of r. [2] 

 (ii) Hence show that the area, A cm^2 , of the shaded region PQRS is given by A = 50 r r^2. [2] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/13/O/N/19 [Turn over** 

 (iii) Given that r can vary and that A has a maximum value, find this value of A. [2] 

 (iv) Given that A is increasing at the rate of 3 cm 2 s-^1 when r = 10, find the corresponding rate of change of r. [3] 

 (v) Find the corresponding rate of change of i when r = 10. [3] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/13/O/N/19** 

**10 (a)** 

 v ms-^1 

(^0) _t_ s 

#### 20 

#### 20 

#### 5 10 

 The velocity-time graph for a particle P is shown by the two straight lines in the diagram. 

 (i) Find the deceleration of P for 5 G t G 10. [2] 

 (ii) Write down the value of t when the speed of P is zero. [1] 

 (iii) Find the distance P has travelled for 0 G t G 10. [2] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/13/O/N/19** 

 (b) A particle Q has a displacement of x m from a fixed point O , t s after leaving O. The velocity, v ms-^1 , of Q at time t s is given by v = 6 e 2 t + 1. 

 (i) Find an expression for x in terms of t. [3] 

 (ii) Find the value of t when the acceleration of Q is 24 ms-^2. [3] 


**©UCLES 2019 0606/13/O/N/19** 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. 

#### BLANK PAGE 


