 This document consists of 7 printed pages. 

© UCLES 2019 **[Turn over** 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

**ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/21** 

Paper 2 **October/November 2019** 

MARK SCHEME 

Maximum Mark: 80 

 Published 

This mark scheme is published as an aid to teachers and candidates, to indicate the requirements of the examination. It shows the basis on which Examiners were instructed to award marks. It does not indicate the details of the discussions that took place at an Examiners’ meeting before marking began, which would have considered the acceptability of alternative answers. 

Mark schemes should be read in conjunction with the question paper and the Principal Examiner Report for Teachers. 

Cambridge International will not enter into discussions about these mark schemes. 

Cambridge International is publishing the mark schemes for the October/November 2019 series for most Cambridge IGCSE™, Cambridge International A and AS Level components and some Cambridge O Level components. 


#### PUBLISHED 

#### 2019 

 Generic Marking Principles 

These general marking principles must be applied by all examiners when marking candidate answers. They should be applied alongside the specific content of the mark scheme or generic level descriptors for a question. Each question paper and mark scheme will also comply with these marking principles. 

#### GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 1: 

 Marks must be awarded in line with: 

- the specific content of the mark scheme or the generic level descriptors for the question 

- the specific skills defined in the mark scheme or in the generic level descriptors for the question 

- the standard of response required by a candidate as exemplified by the standardisation scripts. 

 GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 2: 

 Marks awarded are always whole marks (not half marks, or other fractions). 

 GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 3: 

 Marks must be awarded positively : 

- marks are awarded for correct/valid answers, as defined in the mark scheme. However, credit     is given for valid answers which go beyond the scope of the syllabus and mark scheme,     referring to your Team Leader as appropriate 

- marks are awarded when candidates clearly demonstrate what they know and can do 

- marks are not deducted for errors 

- marks are not deducted for omissions 

- answers should only be judged on the quality of spelling, punctuation and grammar when these     features are specifically assessed by the question as indicated by the mark scheme. The     meaning, however, should be unambiguous. 

 GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 4: 

 Rules must be applied consistently e.g. in situations where candidates have not followed instructions or in the application of generic level descriptors. 

 GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 5: 

 Marks should be awarded using the full range of marks defined in the mark scheme for the question (however; the use of the full mark range may be limited according to the quality of the candidate responses seen). 

 GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 6: 

 Marks awarded are based solely on the requirements as defined in the mark scheme. Marks should not be awarded with grade thresholds or grade descriptors in mind. 


#### PUBLISHED 

#### 2019 

#### MARK SCHEME NOTES 

The following notes are intended to aid interpretation of mark schemes in general, but individual mark schemes may include marks awarded for specific reasons outside the scope of these notes. 

**Types of mark** 

M Method marks, awarded for a valid method applied to the problem. 

A Accuracy mark, awarded for a correct answer or intermediate step correctly obtained. For accuracy marks to be given, the associated Method mark must be earned or implied. 

B Mark for a correct result or statement independent of Method marks. 

When a part of a question has two or more ‘method’ steps, the M marks are in principle independent unless the scheme specifically says otherwise; and similarly where there are several B marks allocated. The notation ‘ **dep** ’ is used to indicate that a particular M or B mark is dependent on an earlier mark in the scheme. 

**Abbreviations** 

awrt answers which round to cao correct answer only dep dependent FT follow through after error isw ignore subsequent working nfww not from wrong working oe or equivalent rot rounded or truncated SC Special Case soi seen or implied 

 Question Answer Marks Partial Marks 

 1(i) B2 B1 shape B1 Correct intersection with axes. 

1(ii) (^) 7 = 2 _x_ – 3 → _x_ = 5 **B1** Uses 7 = 3 – 2 _x_ oe (^) **M1** _x_ = –2 **A1** 2 _p_ = 2 _q_ = 4 _r_ = 3 **B3 B1** for each − 2 2 4 − 4 − 2 2 4 6 x y 


#### PUBLISHED 

#### 2019 

**Question Answer Marks Partial Marks** 

3(a) obtain e^5 _x_^ – 3^ = 3 **M1** (^) **OR** Take logs → 2 _x_ + 1 = ln3 + 4 – 3 _x_ take logs correctly → 5 _x_ – 3 = ln3 **M1** (^) **OR** Collect like terms → 5 _x_ = 3 + ln3 3 ln 3 or 0.820 5 _x x_ 

#### + 

#### = = 

#### A1 

 3(b) Use of laws of logs → lg( y – 6)( y + 15) = 2 

#### M1 

 Uses 10 ଶ^ = 100 → [( y – 6)( y +15)] = 100 

#### B1 

 Obtain correct quadratic → y^2 + 9 y – 190 = 0 

#### A1 

 Solve a three term quadratic M1 

 y = 10 only A1 

 4 Eliminate x or y M1 

#### 7 5 2 

#### 3 2 2 

 x 

#### + 

#### = 

#### + 

 or 

#### 1 

#### 3 2 2 

 y = + 

#### A1 

 Multiply numerator and denominator by 3 − 2 2 

#### M1 

 x = 1 + 2 A1 

 y = 3 − 2 2 A1 

 5(i) Differentiate M1 Obtain 2cos2 t or −2sin2 t 

 v = 6cos2t − 8sin2t A1 

 a = − 12sin2t − 16cos2t A1 

 5(ii) Equate v to 0 and attempt to solve M1 

 tan2t = 0.75 A1 or sin 2 t = 0.6or cos2 t =0.8 

 t = 0.32(2) A1 Must be in radians 

 5(iii) Insert value of t into expression for a M1 Radians or degrees 

 a = − 20 A1 Must have used radians 


#### PUBLISHED 

#### 2019 

**Question Answer Marks Partial Marks** 

 6 Eliminate y M1 

 x^2^ − x − 5 = 0 A1 

Use formula (^) **M1** 

#### 1 21 

#### 2 

 x 

#### ± 

#### = 

#### A1 

#### 21 21 

#### 2 

 y 

#### ± 

#### = 

#### A1 

Find mid-point **M1** (^) ( 0.5 ,10.5) Show that mid-point lies on _x_ + _y_ = 11 **A1** 7(a)(i) (^) f (^) ( 0.5 (^) )= 0.5 + 4.5 − 5 = 0 **B1** 7(a)(ii) (^) Factorise to obtain 2 _x_^2 and 5 **M1** ( 2 _x_ − 1 )( 2 _x_^2 + _x_ + (^5) ) **A1** 7(b)(i) Replace sin tan by cos _x x x_ and 

#### 1 

 sec by cos 

 x x 

#### M1 

 2 2 

 sin 5 13 4sin cos cos 

#### − − 

 x x x x 

#### = 0 

Uses cos^2 _x_ = 1 − sin^2 _x_ **M1**^ 13sin _x_ − 4sin _x_ (^) ( 1 − sin 2 _x_ )− 5 = 0 4sin^3 _x_ + 9sin _x_ − 5 = 0 **A1**^ Completed correctly 7(b)(ii) (^) 2sin^2 _x_ + sin _x_ + 5 = 0 no real roots **B1** Suitable statement seen 2sin _x_ − 1 = 0 **M1** Attempt to solve 

#### 6 

 π x = 

#### A1 

#### 5 

#### 6 

 π x = 

#### A1 

 8(i) –2e–2 x^ seen B1 

 Product rule M1 Clear attempt 

## e −^2 x^ ( 1 − 2 x ) A1 


#### PUBLISHED 

#### 2019 

**Question Answer Marks Partial Marks** 

 8(ii) Set d^0 d 

 y x 

 = and attempt to solve^ 

 M1 Must have two terms 

#### 1 1 

#### , 

 2 2e 

####   

####   

####   

#### A1 

 8(iii) Attempt to find 

 d d 

 y x 

 at x = 1 

#### M1 

## 2 2 (^ ) 

#### 1 1 

#### 1 

 e e 

 y x 

#### − 

− = − or (^2 2) 

#### 1 2 

 e e 

 y = − x + 

#### A1 

 8(iv) Integrate part(i) 

# ( ) 

 x e −^2 x^ = ∫ −2 e x −^2 x^ +e −^2 x d x 

#### M1 

 Integrate e −^2 x and make ∫ x e −^2 x d x the subject 

#### M1 

 e 2 e^2 2 4 

 − x −^^ x^ − x − + c 

#### A1 

9(i) (^1) 3 

#### B1 

#### 3 2 

#### 9 5 

####  −^ −  

#### ×  

####   

#### B1 

9 (ii) (^2 10 7) 42 31 

####   

= (^)     

#### B 

 B2 Minus one each error 

9(iii) (^) **C** = **B**^2 − **BA M1** 

#### 1 1 

#### 15 3 

####   

= (^)    −^ −  

#### BA 

#### A1 

#### 9 6 

#### 57 34 

####   

= (^)     

#### C 

#### A1 

 9(iv) D = B^2 A –^1 M1 

#### 1 33 15 

#### 3 153 71 

####   

= (^)     

#### D 

 A2 Minus one each error 

10(i) (^81) + 108 _x_ + 54 _x_^2^ + 12 _x_^3 + _x_^4 **B3 B1** for coefficients **B1** for powers **B1** for all Correct 


#### PUBLISHED 

#### 2019 

**Question Answer Marks Partial Marks** 

 10(ii) Identify and select two terms in x and equate to zero 

 M1 81 – 54 p = 0 

 p = 1.5 A1 

 10(iii) Constant term = –108 p = –162 A1 FT using their p 

 10(iv) Correctly identify two terms in x^2 M1 x^2 term = 108 – 12 p 

 108 – 18 = 90 A1 

 11(i) Uses correct triangle with vw opposite 10° Sides of 300 and 280 include 10° 

#### M1 

Use cosine rule **M1** (^) _vw_^2 = 3002 + 2802 − 2 × 300 ×280cos10 _vw_ = 54.3 **A1** 11(ii) Use sine rule **M1** (^) 280 54.3 sinα sin10 

#### = 

#### ° 

### α = 63 ° or 64 ° A1 

 Bearing 117° or 116 ° A1 


