 This document has 16 pages. Blank pages are indicated. 

IB20 03_0620_22/5RP© UCLES 2020 (^) **[Turn over** 

## *0772987719* 

# Cambridge IGCSE ™ 

### CHEMISTRY 0620/22 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) February/March 2020 45 minutes You must answer on the multiple choice answer sheet. You will need: Multiple choice answer sheetSoft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) INSTRUCTIONS 

- There are **forty** questions on this paper. Answer **all** questions. 

- For each question there are four possible answersand record your choice in soft pencil on the multiple choice answer sheet. **A** , **B** , **C** and **D**. Choose the **one** you consider correct 

- Follow the instructions on the multiple choice answer sheet. 

- Write in soft pencil. 

- Write your name, centre number and candidate number on the multiple choice answer sheet in thespaces provided unless this has been done for you. 

- Do **not** use correction fluid. 

- Do **not** write on any bar codes. 

- You may use a calculator. **INFORMATION** 

- The total mark for this paper is 40. 

- Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. 

- Any rough working should be done on this question paper. 

- The Periodic Table is printed in the question paper. 


© UCLES 2020 0620/22/F/M/20 

**1** The formula of methane is CH 4 and the formula of ethane is C 2 H 6. Which row describes diffusion and the relative rates of diffusion of methane and ethane? description of diffusion relative rate of diffusion **A** particles move from to a low concentrationa high concentration 

 ethane diffuses more quickly than methane B particles move from a high concentration to a low concentration 

 methane diffuses more quickly than ethane C particles move froma low concentration to a high concentration 

 quickly than methaneethane diffuses more D particles move froma low concentration to a high concentration 

 methane diffuses morequickly than ethane 

**2** Which test is used to show that a sample of water is pure? **A** Evaporate the water to see if any solids remain. **B** Heat the water to check its boiling point. 

## C Test with anhydrous cobalt(II) chloride. 

 D Use universal indicator paper to check its pH. 

**3** Chromatography is used to separate and identify the components in both coloured and colourless mixtures. For colourless mixtures the chromatogram has to be treated with another chemical. What is the name of this type of chemical? **A** colouring agent **B** display agent **C** finding agent **D** locating agent 


© UCLES 2020 0620/22/F/M/20 **[Turn over** 

**4** Lithium reacts with fluorine to form the compound lithium fluoride. Which statement about this reaction is correct? **A** Each fluorine atom gains one electron. **B** Each fluorine atom gains two or more electrons. **C** Each fluorine atom loses one electron. **D** Each fluorine atom loses two or more electrons. 

**5**^146 Cand 126 Care isotopes of carbon. 

 Which statement about these isotopes is correct? A^126 Cis more reactive than 146 Cbecause the atoms have less mass. B^126 Cis more reactive than 146 Cbecause the atoms have different numbers of neutrons. C The reactions of 126 Care similar to 146 Cbecause they have the same number of outer shell electrons. D The reactions of 126 C are similar to 146 C because they have the same number of protons in the nucleus. 

**6** The molecular structure of hydrazine, N 2 H 4 , is shown. 

 N H 

### H 

### H 

### H 

### N 

 Which description of the bonding in hydrazine is not correct? A Each nitrogen atom has a non-bonding pair of electrons. B Each nitrogen atom has four bonding pairs of electrons. C Each nitrogen atom shares one of its electrons with a nitrogen atom. D Each nitrogen atom shares two of its electrons with hydrogen atoms. 


© UCLES 2020 0620/22/F/M/20 

**7** Solid X has a high boiling point. Its structure has positive ions surrounded by a sea of electrons. Which other properties does solid X have? **A** brittle and an electrical conductor **B** brittle and an insulator **C** malleable and an electrical conductor **D** malleable and an insulator 

**8** The formulae of some ions are shown. 

 positive ions negative ions A l 3+^ C l – Fe 2+^ N3– Mg 2+^ NO 3 – Na +^ O2– Zn 2+^ SO 4 2– In which row is the formula not correct? compound formula 

**A** aluminium oxide A _l_ (^) 2 O 3 

## B iron(II) nitride Fe 2 N 3 

 C sodium sulfate Na 2 SO 4 

**D** zinc nitrate Zn(NO 3 ) (^2) **9** The equation for the decomposition of magnesium nitrate is shown. 2Mg(NO 3 ) 2 (s) → 2MgO(s) + 4NO 2 (g) + O 2 (g) Which volume of gas is produced when 0.1 moles of magnesium nitrate is decomposed completely? **A** 1.2 dm^3 **B** 4.8 dm^3 **C** 6.0 dm^3 **D** 8.4 dm^3 


© UCLES 2020 0620/22/F/M/20 **[Turn over** 

## 10 Which statements about the electrolysis of molten lead(II) bromide are correct? 

 1 Lead ions move to the anode and are oxidised. 2 Lead ions move to the cathode and are reduced. 3 Bromide ions move to the anode and are oxidised. 4 Bromide ions move to the cathode and are reduced. A 1 and 3 B 1 and 4 C 2 and 3 D 2 and 4 

## 11 Aqueous copper(II) sulfate is electrolysed using carbon electrodes. 

 Which statement is correct? A Bubbles of hydrogen are formed at the anode. B Bubbles of oxygen gas are formed at the cathode. C Copper is deposited at the anode. D The blue colour of the solution fades. 

**12** Nitrogen trifluoride, NF 3 , is used in the manufacture of certain types of solar panels. The equation for the formation of nitrogen trifluoride is shown. 

N 2 + 3F 2 → 2NF (^3) type of bond bond energy (kJ mol –1) N≡N +950 F–F +150 N–F +280 Using the table of bond energies, what is the energy change for this reaction? **A** –560 kJ mol –1 **B** –280 kJ mol –1 **C** +280 kJ mol –1 **D** +3080 kJ mol –1 


© UCLES 2020 0620/22/F/M/20 

**13** Which statements about hydrogen fuel cells are correct? 1 The reaction between hydrogen and oxygen is endothermic. 2 The waste product in a hydrogen fuel cell is water. 3 A chemical reaction in the cell produces hydrogen which is used as the fuel. 4 A hydrogen fuel cell is used to generate electricity. **A** 1 and 2 **B** 1 and 3 **C** 2 and 4 **D** 3 and 4 

**14** Which change is a physical change? 

## A Copper(II) carbonate changes colour from green to black when it is heated, and stays black 

 when it cools. B Ethanol reacts with oxygen to form carbon dioxide and water. C Hydrogen peroxide decomposes into water and oxygen when it is boiled. D Ice forms liquid water when it is heated. 

**15** A student adds excess magnesium ribbon to 10 cm^3 of 0.5 mol / dm^3 sulfuric acid. The hydrogen gas is collected and its volume measured every 10 seconds. The experiment is repeated using the same mass of magnesium ribbon with 5 cm^3 of 0.5 mol / dm^3 sulfuric acid added to 5 cm^3 of water. Which graph shows the results of the second experiment? 250 200 150 100 50 

(^00 50 100 150 200 250) time / seconds volume of hydrogen / cm 3 

### A 

### B 

### C 

### D 

 original experiment 


© UCLES 2020 0620/22/F/M/20 **[Turn over** 

**16** An equilibrium reaction is shown. N 2 O 4 (g) 2NO 2 (g) The forward reaction is endothermic. What is the effect of changing the temperature and pressure on the equilibrium position? increasing temperature increasing pressure **A** moves to the left moves to the left **B** moves to the left moves to the right **C** moves to the right moves to the left **D** moves to the right moves to the right 

**17** In which reaction is the underlined compound acting as a reducing agent? **A** CO 2 + C → 2CO **B** 2CuO + C → 2Cu + CO 2 **C** Fe 2 O 3 + 3CO → 2Fe + 3CO 2 

**D** CaCO 3 + 2HC _l_ → CaC _l_ (^) 2 + H 2 O + CO 2 **18** X, Y and Z are oxides of elements in the same row of the Periodic Table. Some information about each oxide is shown. oxide solubilityin water neutraliseability to an acid neutraliseability to an alkali X soluble   key Y insoluble   = able Z slightly soluble   = not able Which types of oxides are X, Y and Z? X Y Z **A** acidic amphoteric basic **B** amphoteric basic basic **C** basic amphoteric acidic **D** basic acidic amphoteric 


© UCLES 2020 0620/22/F/M/20 

**19** Four different acids are dissolved in water. Which beaker contains the most concentrated strong acid solution? 

 HX HX HX 

 HX 

 HX HX HX HX 

 X – H + H + 

 H + X – 

 Z– Z– 

 Z– Z– Z– Z– 

 Y – 

 Y – 

 X – 

### C 

 H + 

 H + 

 H + H + 

 W– 

 W–^ W– 

 W– 

### D 

 HY 

 HY HY 

 HY 

 HY 

 HY H + H + 

### A 

 H + H + 

 H + 

 H + H + 

 H + 

### B 

**20** The following substances can be reacted together to prepare salts. 

## 1 copper(II) oxide and excess hydrochloric acid 

 2 hydrochloric acid and excess sodium hydroxide 3 hydrochloric acid and excess zinc carbonate In which reactions can the excess reactant be separated from the solution by filtration? A 1 and 2 B 1 and 3 C 2 and 3 D 3 only 


© UCLES 2020 0620/22/F/M/20 **[Turn over** 

**21** Salt S is dissolved in water and three tests are carried out on the solution. 

 test result 1 aqueous sodiumhydroxide is added green precipitate formed,insoluble in excess sodium hydroxide 2 dilute nitric acid is added no reaction 3 aqueous barium nitrate is added to the acidified solution from test 2 

 white precipitate formed 

 What is the identity of S? 

## A copper(II) chloride 

## B copper(II) sulfate 

## C iron(II) chloride 

## D iron(II) sulfate 

**22** Which statement about the Periodic Table is correct? **A** Most metallic elements are on the left. **B** Elements in the same period have the same number of outer electrons. **C** Elements on the left are usually gases. **D** The relative atomic mass of the elements increases from right to left. 

**23** The diagram shows elements W, X, Y and Z in a section of the Periodic Table. 

### X 

### Y 

### Z 

### W 

 Which statement about the reactivity of the elements is correct? A X is more reactive than Y, and W is more reactive than Z. B X is more reactive than Y, and Z is more reactive than W. C Y is more reactive than X, and W is more reactive than Z. D Y is more reactive than X, and Z is more reactive than W. 


© UCLES 2020 0620/22/F/M/20 

**24** Some properties of substances are listed. 1 They conduct electricity. 2 They have low densities. 3 They have high melting points. 4 They are malleable. Which properties are shown by transition metals? **A** 1 and 3 only **B** 1 and 4 only **C** 1, 2 and 3 **D** 1, 3 and 4 

**25** Sodium is a Group I metal. Which property, that is typical of most metals, is **not** shown by sodium? **A** conductor of heat **B** high melting point **C** malleable **D** shiny 

**26** Four metals, iron, copper, magnesium and Y, are heated separately with their oxides. The results are shown. metal magnesiumoxide oxideY copperoxide oxideiron Y     key magnesium     = reacts copper     = no reaction iron     What is the order of reactivity of the metals, least reactive first? least reactive most reactive **A** copper iron Y magnesium **B** copper Y iron magnesium **C** magnesium iron Y copper **D** magnesium Y iron copper 


© UCLES 2020 0620/22/F/M/20 **[Turn over** 

**27** Aluminium is extracted from bauxite by electrolysis. Which statement is correct? **A** Aluminium ions are oxidised to form aluminium. **B** The cathode has to be replaced regularly because it reacts with the oxygen which is formed. **C** Cryolite is added to remove impurities. **D** Carbon dioxide is produced at the anode. 

**28** Some properties of aluminium are listed. 1 It conducts heat. 2 It has a low density. 3 It is strong. 4 It is resistant to corrosion. Which of these properties make aluminium suitable for making food containers for chilled food products? **A** 1, 2 and 4 **B** 1, 3 and 4 **C** 1 only **D** 4 only 

**29** Water is treated at a waterworks to make it fit to drink. What is present in the water when it leaves the waterworks? **A** bacteria only **B** bacteria and insoluble substances **C** chlorine compounds only **D** chlorine compounds and soluble substances 

**30** Sulfur dioxide, carbon monoxide and oxides of nitrogen are common gaseous pollutants found in the air. Which pollutants contribute to acid rain? **A** carbon monoxide and sulfur dioxide **B** oxides of nitrogen and sulfur dioxide **C** oxides of nitrogen only **D** sulfur dioxide only 


© UCLES 2020 0620/22/F/M/20 

**31** Oxides of nitrogen, such as NO and NO 2 , are formed in the petrol engines of cars. They are removed from the exhaust gases by reactions in the car’s catalytic converter. Which row describes how oxides of nitrogen are formed in a petrol engine, and a reaction that happens in the catalytic converter? 

how oxides of nitrogen are formed (^) in the catalytic convertora reaction that happens **A** (^) nitrogen and oxygen from the airby the reaction between 2NO + 2CO → N 2 + 2CO 2 **B** by the reaction between nitrogen and oxygen from the air 2NO + 2H^2 →^ N^2 + 2H^2 O **C** by the reaction between nitrogen compounds in petrol and oxygen from the air 2NO + 2CO^ →^ N^2 + 2CO^2 **D** (^) compounds in petrol and oxygen from the airby the reaction between nitrogen 2NO + 2H 2 → N 2 + 2H 2 O **32** Zinc is used to cover iron to prevent it from rusting. Why is zinc a suitable metal to use? **A** Iron is more reactive than zinc. **B** Iron atoms are bigger than zinc atoms. **C** Zinc is more reactive than iron. **D** Zinc atoms are bigger than iron atoms. **33** Fertilisers are mixtures of different compounds used to increase the growth of crops. Which pair of substances contain the three essential elements for plant growth? **A** ammonium nitrate and calcium phosphate **B** ammonium nitrate and potassium chloride **C** ammonium phosphate and potassium chloride **D** potassium nitrate and calcium carbonate 


© UCLES 2020 0620/22/F/M/20 **[Turn over** 

**34** Which row describes the conditions used in the manufacture of sulfuric acid by the Contactprocess? 

 catalyst pressure temperature A iron high high B iron low low 

## C vanadium(V) oxide high low 

## D vanadium(V) oxide low high 

**35** Petroleum is an important raw material that is separated into useful products. Which terms describe petroleum and the method used to separate it? description separation method **A** compound cracking **B** compound fractional distillation **C** mixture cracking **D** mixture fractional distillation 

**36** Which statements about propene are correct? 1 Propene contains only single bonds. 2 Propene decolourises bromine water. 3 Propene is obtained by cracking. 4 Propene is a hydrocarbon. **A** 1 and 4 **B** 2, 3 and 4 **C** 2 and 4 only **D** 4 only 

**37** Which row describes the production of ethanol and its properties? 

 can be made from glucose 

 can be made from ethene 

 is used as a fuel 

 is used as a solvent A     key B     = yes C     = no D     


© UCLES 2020 0620/22/F/M/20 

**38** Ethanoic acid is a typical carboxylic acid. Which statement about ethanoic acid is correct? **A** It can be oxidised to produce ethanol. **B** It is a proton acceptor. **C** It is fully dissociated in water. **D** It reacts with ethanol to produce ethyl ethanoate and water. 

**39** Which structure represents the ester made from ethanoic acid and propanol? 

### H O 

### H C 

### H 

### H 

### H 

### C 

### H 

### C 

### H 

### H 

### C 

### H 

### C O H 

### A 

### H O 

### H C 

### H 

### H 

### C 

### H 

### H 

### C 

### H 

### H 

### C 

### H 

### H 

### C H 

### H 

### C O 

### B 

### H O 

### H C 

### H 

### H 

### C 

### H 

### H 

### C 

### H 

### C O H 

### C 

### H 

### H C 

### H 

### H 

### C 

### H 

### H 

### C 

### H 

### O 

### C 

### H 

### C 

### H 

### O H 

### D 

**40** The structure of a polymer is shown. 

 C 

### O 

### O 

### N C 

### H 

### H 

### N C 

### H O 

### N 

 Which statements about the polymer are correct? 1 The polymer is nylon. 2 The polymer is formed by condensation polymerisation. 3 There are ester linkages between the monomers. A 1 and 2 B 2 and 3 C 2 only D 3 only 


### BLANK PAGE 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeAssessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University ofCambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2020 0620/22/F/M/20 


© UCLES 2020 0620/22/F/M/20 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements^1 Hhydrogen^1 

(^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Beberyllium 9 **Key** atomic numberatomic symbol name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mgmagnesium 24 19 Kpotassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Srstrontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Gegermanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 (^22) Tititanium (^4840) Zrzirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rfrutherfordium– 23 Vvanadium (^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Crchromium (^5242) Momolybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sgseaborgium– (^25) Mnmanganese (^5543) Tctechnetium– (^75) Rerhenium (^186107) Bhbohrium– (^26) Feiron (^5644) Ruruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Iriridium (^192109) Mtmeitnerium– (^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pdpalladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Dsdarmstadtium– (^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rgroentgenium– (^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cdcadmium (^11280) Hgmercury (^201112) Cncopernicium– 114 F _l_ flerovium– (^116) Lvlivermorium– (^7) Nnitrogen 1415 Pphosphorus (^3133) Asarsenic (^7551) Sbantimony 12283 Bibismuth 209 (^8) Ooxygen 1616 Ssulfur (^3234) Seselenium (^7952) Tetellurium (^12884) Popolonium– (^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Brbromine 8053 I iodine 12785 Atastatine– (^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Scscandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) Lalanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). actinium– (^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium^141 (^91) Paprotactinium 231 (^60) Ndneodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pmpromethium– (^93) Npneptunium– (^62) Smsamarium (^15094) Puplutonium– (^63) Eueuropium (^15295) Amamericium– (^64) Gdgadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bkberkelium– (^66) Dydysprosium 16398 Cfcalifornium– (^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Eseinsteinium– (^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Mdmendelevium– (^70) Ybytterbium (^173102) Nonobelium– (^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lrlawrencium– 


