 This document consists of 16 printed pages. 

 DC (NH/JG) 116665/2 © UCLES 2016 [Turn over 

* 1 0 7 8 7 6 6 1 6 2 * 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/21 Paper 2 October/November 2016 2 hours Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all the questions. Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 


© UCLES 2016 0606/21/O/N/16 

 Mathematical Formulae 

### 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

 x 

 b b ac a 

 = 

 − 2 − 4 2 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( _n_ 

# 1 ) a 

_n_ –1 (^) _b_ + 

# ( 

 n 

# 2 ) a 

_n_ –2 (^) _b_ (^2) + … + 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) a 

_n_ – _r_ (^) _br_ (^) + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( _n_ 

# r )^ =^ 

 n! ( n – r )! r! 

### 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ 

 sin 2 A + cos^2 A = 1 

 sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A 

 cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC_ 

 a sin A =^ 

 b sin B =^ 

 c sin C 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

 ∆ = 1 2 

 bc sin A 


© UCLES 2016 0606/21/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**1** Solve the equation 4 _x_ 3 = _x_. [3] 

**2 Without using a calculator** , find the integers _a_ and _b_ such that 3 1 3 1 

 a b 3 3 + 

### + 

### 

### = -. [5] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/21/O/N/16 

**3** Solve the equation (^2 2) 

### 10 

 lg x lg 1 

 x 

- 

### + 

c m (^) =. [5] **4** The number of bacteria, _N_ , present in a culture can be modelled by the equation _N_ = 7000 + 2000 e 0.05^ _t_ , where _t_ is measured in days. Find **(i)** the number of bacteria when _t_ = 10, [1] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/21/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

 (ii) the value of t when the number of bacteria reaches 7500, [3] 

 (iii) the rate at which the number of bacteria is decreasing after 8 days. [3] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/21/O/N/16 

**5** The curve with equation _y_ = _x_^3 + 2 _x_^2 7 _x_ + 2 passes through the point _A_ (−2, 16). Find 

 (i) the equation of the tangent to the curve at the point A , [3] 

 (ii) the coordinates of the point where this tangent meets the curve again. [5] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/21/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**6 (i)** Prove that (^1) +cos tan _x x_ (^1) +sin cot^ _x_^ _x_ = cos _x_ sin _x_. [4] **(ii)** Hence solve the equation (^1) +cos tan _x x_ (^1) +sin cot^ _x_^ _x_ = 3 sin _x_ 4 cos _x_ for 180° 1 _x_ 1 180°. [4] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/21/O/N/16 

### 7 

 14 cm 

 x cm 

### P S 

### Q R 

 x cm 

 3 cm 

 (i) Show that the area, A cm^2 , of the trapezium PQRS is given by A = ^ 7 + x h^9 x^2. [2] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/21/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

 (ii) Given that x can vary, find the stationary value of A. [7] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/21/O/N/16 

**8** The function f^ h _x_ is given by 1 

 x^3 1 x 

 f x 3 

 3 = + 

 ^ h for 0 G x G 3. 

 (i) Show that 1 

 x x 

 f kx 3 2 

 2 = + 

 l^ ^ 

 h h 

 , where k is a constant to be determined. [3] 

 (ii) Find x 1 

_x_ (^) d _x_ 3 2 2 ^ (^) + h 

## y and hence evaluate^ 

 x 1 

_x_ (^) d _x_ 3 2 1 2 2 ^ (^) + h 

## y.^ [4] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/21/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

 (iii) Find f −1( x ), stating its domain. [4] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/21/O/N/16 

**9** The line _y_ = _kx_ 4 , where _k_ is a positive constant, passes through the point _P_ (0, _−_ 4) and is a tangent to the curve _x_^2 + _y_^2 2 _y_ = 8 at the point _T_. Find 

 (i) the value of k , [5] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/21/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

 (ii) the coordinates of T , [3] 

 (iii) the length of TP. [2] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/21/O/N/16 

**10** The town of Cambley is 5 km east and _p_ km north of Edwintown so that the position vector of Cambley 

 from Edwintown is c 1000 5000 p mmetres. Manjit sets out from Edwintown at the same time as Raj sets out from Cambley. Manjit sets out from Edwintown on a bearing of 020° at a speed of 2.5 ms–1^ so that her 

position vector relative to Edwintown after _t_ seconds is given by (^) 2.5 20° 

### 2.5 70° 

 cos 

 cos t 

 c t m metres. Raj sets out from Cambley on a bearing of 310° at 2 ms –1. 

 (i) Find the position vector of Raj relative to Edwintown after t seconds. [2] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/21/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

 Manjit and Raj meet after T seconds. 

 (ii) Find the value of T and of p. [5] 

 Question 11 is printed on the next page. 


© UCLES 2016 0606/21/O/N/16 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

**11** Mr and Mrs Coldicott have 5 sons and 4 daughters. All 11 members of the family play tennis. Six members of the family enter a tennis competition where teams consist of 4 males and 2 females. 

 Find the number of different teams of 4 males and 2 females that could be selected if 

 (i) there are no further restrictions, [2] 

 (ii) Mr and Mrs Coldicott must both be in the team, [2] 

 (iii) either Mr or Mrs Coldicott is in the team but not both. [3] 


