 This document consists of 16 printed pages. 

 DC (LK/SG) 116670/2 © UCLES 2016 [Turn over 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

* 3 6 6 6 4 5 3 2 4 9 * 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/23 Paper 2 October/November 2016 2 hours Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all the questions. Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 


© UCLES 2016 0606/23/O/N/16 

 Mathematical Formulae 

## 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

 x 

 b b ac a 

 = 

 − 2 − 4 2 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( _n_ 

# 1 ) a 

_n_ –1 (^) _b_ + 

# ( 

 n 

# 2 ) a 

_n_ –2 (^) _b_ (^2) + … + 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) a 

_n_ – _r_ (^) _br_ (^) + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( _n_ 

# r ) =^ 

 n! ( n – r )! r! 

## 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ 

 sin 2 A + cos^2 A = 1 

 sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A 

 cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC_ 

 a sin A =^ 

 b sin B =^ 

 c sin C 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

 ∆ = 1 2 

 bc sin A 


© UCLES 2016 0606/23/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

 1 Without using a calculator , show that k 5 3 

(^5 3 3 2) + + (^) = where _k_ is an integer to be found. [3] **2** Solve the equation e 3 _x_^^ = 6 e _x_. [3] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/23/O/N/16 

**3 (i)** Show that (^) dd _x_^ c^1 +sin cos _xx_ m^ = (^1) +^1 cos _x_. [4] **(ii)** _y x_ 

## 3 

## 2 

## 1 

(^0 1 2) _y =_ 

## 1 

 1 + cos x 

 The diagram shows part of the graph of cos 

 y 1 x 

## = 1 

## + 

. Use the result from part **(i)** to find the area enclosed by the graph and the lines _x_ = 0 , _x_ = 2 and _y_ = 0. [2] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/23/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**4** The cubic given by p ( ) _x_ = _x_^3 + _ax_^2 + _bx_ 24 is divisible by _x_ 2. When p ( ) _x_ is divided by _x_ 1 the remainder is 20. 

 (i) Form a pair of equations in a and b and solve them to find the value of a and of b. [4] 

 (ii) Factorise p ( ) x completely and hence solve p ( ) x = 0. [4] 


 © UCLES 2016 0606/23/O/N/16 

**5** In this question all lengths are in centimetres. 

## A 

## C B 

## 60° 

 In the triangle ABC shown above, AC = 3 + 1 , BC = 3 1 and angle ACB = 60 °. 

 (i) Without using a calculator , show that the length of AB = 6. [3] 

 (ii) Show that angle CAB = 15 °. [2] 

 (iii) Without using a calculator , find the area of triangle ABC. [2] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/23/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**6** A curve has equation _y_ = 7 + tan _x_. Find 

 (i) the equation of the tangent to the curve at the point where x 4 

 =^ r , [4] 

 (ii) the values of x between 0 and r radians for which d 

 d x 

 y = y. [4] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/23/O/N/16 

**7** In this question all lengths are in metres. 

_h_ (^) 0.5 _h_ + 2 _r_ A conical tent is to be made with height _h_ , base radius _r_ and slant height 0.5 _h_ + 2, as shown in the diagram. **(i)** Show that _r_^2 = 2 _h_ + 4 0 75. _h_^2. [2] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/23/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

 The volume of the tent, V , is given by 31 rr h^2. 

 (ii) Given that h can vary find, correct to 2 decimal places, the value of h which gives a stationary value of V. [5] 

 (iii) Determine the nature of this stationary value. [2] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/23/O/N/16 

## 8 

 10 cm 

 6 cm 

## A 

## C 

## T O B 

 The points A , B and C lie on a circle centre O, radius 6 cm. The tangents to the circle at A and C meet at the point T. The length of OT is 10 cm. Find 

 (i) the angle TOA in radians, [2] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/23/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

 (ii) the area of the region TABCT, [6] 

 (iii) the perimeter of the region TABCT. [2] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/23/O/N/16 

**9** In this question **i** is a unit vector due east and **j** is a unit vector due north. Units of length and velocity are metres and metres per second respectively. 

 The initial position vectors of particles A and B , relative to a fixed point O , are i +5 j and q i – 15 j respectively. A and B start moving at the same time. A moves with velocity p i – 3 j and B moves with velocity 3 i – j. 

 (i) Given that A travels with a speed of 5 ms –1, find the value of the positive constant p. [1] 

 (ii) Find the direction of motion of B as a bearing correct to the nearest degree. [2] 

 (iii) State the position vector of A after t seconds. [1] 

 (iv) State the position vector of B after t seconds. [1] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/23/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

 (v) Find the time taken until A and B meet. [2] 

 (vi) Find the position vector of the point where A and B meet. [1] 

 (vii) Find the value of the constant q. [1] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/23/O/N/16 

**10** The functions f and g are defined for _x_ 2 1 by 

 f ( ) x = 2 + ln x , 

 g ( ) x = 2 e x + 3. 

 (i) Find fg ( ) x. [1] 

 (ii) Find ff ( ) x. [1] 

 (iii) Find g -^1 ( ) x. [2] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/23/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

 (iv) Solve the equation f ( ) x = 4. [1] 

 (v) Solve the equation gf ( ) x = 20. [4] 

 Question 11 is printed on the next page. 


© UCLES 2016 0606/23/O/N/16 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

**11** It is given that **A** _p_ 

 2 q 3 

## = 

## J 

## L 

## KK 

## N 

## P 

 OO and that A^2 5 A = 2 I , where I is the identity matrix. 

 (i) Find a relationship connecting the constants p and q. [4] 

 (ii) Given that p and q are positive and that det A =3 p, find the value of p and of q. [4] 


