 This document consists of 16 printed pages. 

 DC (NH/FC) 135359/3 © UCLES 2017 [Turn over 

* 1 4 0 4 3 0 1 9 6 4 * 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/11 Paper 1 October/November 2017 2 hours Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all the questions. Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 


© UCLES 2017 0606/11/O/N/17 

 Mathematical Formulae 

## 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

 x a 

 b b ac 2 

## = -^!^2 -^4 

## . 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( _n_ 

# 1 ) a 

_n_ –1 (^) _b_ + 

# ( 

 n 

# 2 ) a 

_n_ –2 (^) _b_ (^2) + … + 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) a 

_n_ – _r_ (^) _br_ (^) + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( _n_ 

# r ) =^ 

 n! ( n – r )! r! 

## . 

## 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ 

 sin^2 A + cos^2 A = 1 

 sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A 

 cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC_ 

 a sin A =^ 

 b sin B =^ 

 c sin C 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

## ∆ = 

 1 2 

 bc sin A 


© UCLES 2017 0606/11/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**1** Express in set notation the shaded regions shown in the Venn diagrams below. 

 (i)  

## A B 

## ........................................ [1] 

 (ii)  A B 

## C 

## ........................................ [1] 

 (iii)  

## A B 

## ........................................ [1] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/11/O/N/17 

**2** The polynomial p( _x_ ) is _ax_^3 + _bx_^2 13 _x_ + 4 , where _a_ and _b_ are integers. Given that 2 _x_ 1 is a factor of p ( ) _x_ and also a factor of pl( ) _x_ , 

 (i) find the value of a and of b. [5] 

 Using your values of a and b, 

 (ii) find the remainder when p ( ) x is divided by x + 1. [2] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/11/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**3 (a)** Given that _T_ 2 _l g_^2 

 1 21 = r -^ , express l in terms of T , g and r. [2] 

 (b) By using the substitution y x^3 

 1 = , or otherwise, solve x^34 x 3 0 

 2 31 

- + =. [4] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/11/O/N/17 

**4** When lg _y_ is plotted against _x_^2 a straight line is obtained which passes through the points (4, 3) and (12, 7). 

 (i) Find the gradient of the line. [1] 

 (ii) Use your answer to part (i) to express lg y in terms of x. [2] 

 (iii) Hence express y in terms of x , giving your answer in the form y A 10 bx 

 2 = ^^ h^ where A and b are constants. [3] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/11/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

## 5 

 y 

 y = 4e^2 x^ + 16e–2 x 

 O 1 x 

## A 

## B 

 The diagram shows part of the graph of y = 4 e 2 x^^ + 16 e-^2 x meeting the y -axis at the point A and the line x = 1 at the point B. 

 (i) Find the coordinates of A. [1] 

 (ii) Find the y -coordinate of B. [1] 

**(iii)** Find (^) y ^ 4 e 2 _x_^^ + 16 e -^2 _x_ hd _x_. [2] **(iv)** Hence find the area of the shaded region enclosed by the curve and the line _AB_. You must show all your working. [4] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/11/O/N/17 

**6 (a)** Functions f and g are such that, for _x_ dR , 

 f ^ h x = x^2 + 3 , 

 g ^ h x = 4 x 1. 

 (i) State the range of f. [1] 

 (ii) Solve fg ( ) x = 4. [3] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/11/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**(b)** A function h is such that h ^ h _x_^ = (^2) _xx_^ + 41 for _x_ d R , _x_! 4. **(i)** Find h -^1 ^ h _x_^ and state its range. [4] **(ii)** Find h^2 ^ h _x_ , giving your answer in its simplest form. [3] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/11/O/N/17 

**7 (i)** Write ln _x_ 

 x 2 1 

## 2 1 

## 

## J + 

## L 

## KK 

## N 

## P 

 OO as the difference of two logarithms. [1] 

 A curve has equation y ln x 

 x x 2 1 

## 2 1 

## = 4 

## 

## + 

## + 

## J 

## L 

## KK 

## N 

## P 

 OO for x 2 

## 2 1. 

 (ii) Using your answer to part (i) show that x 

 y x 

 ax b d 4 1 

 d 2 

 2 = 

- 

+ (^) , where _a_ and _b_ are integers. [4] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/11/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

 (iii) Hence find the xcoordinate of the stationary point on the curve. [2] 

 (iv) Determine the nature of this stationary point. [2] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/11/O/N/17 

**8 (a)** 10 people are to be chosen, to receive concert tickets, from a group of 8 men and 6 women. 

 (i) Find the number of different ways the 10 people can be chosen if 6 of them are men and 4 of them are women. [2] 

 The group of 8 men and 6 women contains a man and his wife. 

 (ii) Find the number of different ways the 10 people can be chosen if both the man and his wife are chosen or neither of them is chosen. [3] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/11/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

 (b) Freddie has forgotten the 6-digit code that he uses to lock his briefcase. He knows that he did not repeat any digit and that he did not start his code with a zero. 

 (i) Find the number of different 6-digit numbers he could have chosen. [1] 

 Freddie also remembers that his 6-digit code is divisible by 5. 

 (ii) Find the number of different 6-digit numbers he could have chosen. [3] 

 Freddie decides to choose a new 6-digit code for his briefcase once he has opened it. He plans to have the 6-digit number divisible by 2 and greater than 600 000, again with no repetitions of digits. 

 (iii) Find the number of different 6-digit numbers he can choose. [3] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/11/O/N/17 

## 9 

## P 

## A 

## Q 

## B 

 10 cm 24 cm 

 The diagram shows a circle, centre A , radius 10 cm, intersecting a circle, centre B , radius 24 cm. The two circles intersect at the points P and Q. The radii AP and AQ are tangents to the circle with centre B. The radii BP and BQ are tangents to the circle with centre A. 

 (i) Show that angle PAQ is 2.35 radians, correct to 3 significant figures. [2] 

 (ii) Find angle PBQ in radians. [1] 

 (iii) Find the perimeter of the shaded region. [3] 


© UCLES 2017 0606/11/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

 (iv) Find the area of the shaded region. [4] 

 Question 10 is printed on the next page. 


© UCLES 2017 0606/11/O/N/17 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

**10 (a)** Solve 3 cosec 2 _x_ 4 sin 2 _x_ = 0 for 0 ° G _x_ G 180°. [4] 

 (b) Solve 3 tan y 4 

## 3 

 r 

- = 

## J 

## L 

## KK 

## N 

## P 

 OO for 0 G y G 2 r radians, giving your answers in terms of r. [4] 


