 This syllabus is regulated for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 16 printed pages. 

 IB19 11_0610_12/4RP © UCLES 2019 [Turn over 

# *9606095866* 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## BIOLOGY 0610/12 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) October/November 2019 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2019 0610/12/O/N/19 

**1** The diagrams show a test-tube containing pond water. The green colour is caused by microorganisms that have chloroplasts. 

 pale green pond water 

 light off 

 dark green area 

 light on 

 oxygen bubble 

 Which characteristics of living organisms are shown? 

 A excretion, growth and movement 

 B movement, nutrition and sensitivity 

 C nutrition, reproduction and respiration 

 D reproduction, sensitivity and growth 

**2** Which shows an organism that has been named using the binomial system? 

 A Brown seaweed 

 B Polar bear 

 C Red fox 

 D Vulpes vulpes 

**3** The diagram shows an arthropod. 

 pedipalp 

 legs 

 To which group does it belong? 

 A arachnids 

 B crustaceans 

 C insects 

 D myriapods 


© UCLES 2019 0610/12/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**4** Which features do animal cells share with plant cells? 

 chloroplast cytoplasm nucleus 

 A    key 

 B     = yes 

 C     = no 

 D    

**5** The diagram shows an animal. 

 Use the key to identify the animal. 

 1 wings present ........................................ go to 2 

 wings absent ......................................... go to 3 

 2 one pair of wings visible ........................ A 

 two pairs of wings visible ....................... B 

 3 three pairs of legs .................................. C 

 four pairs of legs .................................... D 

**6** At which level of organisation is a root? 

 A organ 

 B organ system 

 C organism 

 D tissue 


© UCLES 2019 0610/12/O/N/19 

**7** Some pieces of potato were placed in a very concentrated sugar solution. Other pieces of potato were placed in distilled water. 

 What happened to the mass of the potato pieces in the two liquids? 

 mass of the potato pieces in a very concentrated sugar solution 

 mass of the potato pieces in distilled water 

 A decreased decreased 

 B decreased increased 

 C increased decreased 

 D increased increased 

**8** Which identifies the chemical elements found in proteins? 

 carbon hydrogen oxygen nitrogen 

 A     key 

 B     = present 

 C     = absent 

 D     

**9** A student carries out a test to see whether the solution in a test-tube contains protein. 

 Which row shows the correct food test and a positive result? 

 name of test colour seen with apositive result 

 A Benedict’s test blue-black 

 B Benedict’s test purple 

 C biuret test blue-black 

 D biuret test purple 


© UCLES 2019 0610/12/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**10** The diagram shows an experiment investigating the effect of light intensity on an aquatic plant. 

## P Q 

 light source 

 light source 

 20 cm 10 cm 

 Photosynthesis occurred in both test-tube P and test-tube Q. Both test-tubes were kept at the same temperature. The number of bubbles produced in test-tube P was 12 bubbles per minute. 

 What is the most likely number of bubbles produced in one minute in test-tube Q? 

 A 0 B 3 C 12 D 48 

**11** In which situation would insulin secretion usually increase? 

 A after eating a meal 

 B hearing a loud bang immediately behind you 

 C listening to music 

 D reading a book 

**12** The pie charts show the composition of 100 g of four different foods. 

 Which food provides the most energy? 

 key carbohydrate 

 fats and oils 

 protein 

 water 

## A B C D 


© UCLES 2019 0610/12/O/N/19 

**13** The diagram shows the digestive system. 

 Where does egestion take place? 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 

**14** The diagram shows an experiment kept at room temperature. 

 tubing containing starch, protease, protein and simple sugars 

 membrane permeable to small molecules only 

 distilled water 

 test-tube 

 What is present in the water surrounding the membrane after 45 minutes? 

 A amino acids and simple sugars 

 B protein and amino acids 

 C protein and simple sugars 

 D starch and simple sugars 


© UCLES 2019 0610/12/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**15** The diagram shows an experiment to investigate transpiration. 

 balance 

 plant 1 plant 2 

 transparent plastic bag 

 Plant 1 is not covered. Plant 2 and its pot are covered by a transparent plastic bag. 

 The mass of each plant and its pot is measured. The masses are measured again after two hours. 

 What is the result? 

 A The mass of both plants decreases by the same percentage. 

 B The mass of both plants stays the same. 

 C The mass of plant 1 decreases more than the mass of plant 2. 

 D The mass of plant 2 decreases more than the mass of plant 1. 


© UCLES 2019 0610/12/O/N/19 

**16** The diagram shows a vertical section through a human heart. 

## Y 

## X 

 What are X and Y? 

## X Y 

 A left atrium right ventricle 

 B left ventricle right atrium 

 C right atrium left ventricle 

 D right ventricle left atrium 

**17** Which factor increases the risk of developing coronary heart disease? 

 A low fat diet 

 B regular exercise 

 C relaxation 

 D smoking 

**18** The body has several defence mechanisms to protect the body against disease. 

 Which is a chemical barrier? 

 A hair in the nose 

 B mucus 

 C skin 

 D white blood cells 


© UCLES 2019 0610/12/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**19** The diagram shows part of the human gas exchange system. 

 to P 

## R 

## Q 

 Which row identifies P, Q and R? 

## P Q R 

 A alveolus wall capillary wall vein 

 B bronchiole alveolus wall capillary 

 C capillary layer of moisture bronchiole 

 D alveolus wall bronchiole capillary 

**20** When is respiration carried out by green plants? 

 A at all times 

 B at dusk and dawn only 

 C during the night only 

 D never 

**21** Which process releases the most energy from one molecule of glucose? 

 A aerobic respiration 

 B anaerobic respiration in muscle 

 C anaerobic respiration in yeast 

 D photosynthesis 


© UCLES 2019 0610/12/O/N/19 

**22** The diagram shows a simple reflex arc. 

## 1 

 motor neurone activated 

## 2 

 sensory neurone activated 

## 3 

 muscle stimulated 4 receptor stimulated 

 knee tapped here 

 What is the correct order of events after the knee is tapped? 

 A 1 → 2 → 3 → 4 

 B 1 → 4 → 2 → 3 

 C 4 → 2 → 1 → 3 

 D 4 → 3 → 2 → 1 

**23** The diagram shows the eye of a person in a brightly-lit room. 

## P 

## Q 

 What happens to distance P and distance Q when this person moves from the brightly-lit room into a dark room? 

 distance P distance Q 

 A decreases increases 

 B decreases stays the same 

 C increases decreases 

 D stays the same increases 


© UCLES 2019 0610/12/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**24** The diagram shows a leaf as seen in cross-section under the microscope. 

## 1 

## 2 

## 3 

 What are tissues 1, 2 and 3? 

## 1 2 3 

 A epidermis palisade mesophyll spongy mesophyll 

 B epidermis spongy mesophyll palisade mesophyll 

 C palisade mesophyll epidermis spongy mesophyll 

 D spongy mesophyll palisade mesophyll epidermis 


© UCLES 2019 0610/12/O/N/19 

**25** A patient has dye injected into the blood supply to his kidneys. The dye appears in his excretory system as shown. 

 key dye 

 no dye 

 Which part is blocked? 

 A the kidney 

 B the ureter 

 C the bladder 

 D the urethra 

**26** Which organ secretes amylase? 

 A colon 

 B liver 

 C pancreas 

 D stomach 

**27** What is essential for the germination of all seeds? 

 A light 

 B nutrients 

 C water 

 D photosynthesis 


© UCLES 2019 0610/12/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**28** The diagram shows the female reproductive system. 

## 1 

## 2 

## 3 

## 4 

 Where does fertilisation normally occur? 

 A 1 and 2 B 2 only C 3 and 4 D 4 only 

**29** The graph shows the decline in testosterone production as men get older. 

 120 

 100 

 80 

 60 

 40 

 20 

 0 

 testosterone production / arbitrary units 

## 20 30 40 50 60 

 age / years 

## 70 80 90 

 Which age range shows the greatest decline in testosterone production? 

 A 40 to 50 years 

 B 50 to 60 years 

 C 60 to 70 years 

 D 70 to 80 years 

**30** A man has three sons. 

 What is the chance of his next child being a daughter? 

 A 0% B 25% C 50% D 100% 


© UCLES 2019 0610/12/O/N/19 

**31** Which statements about meiosis are correct? 

 produces genetically identical cells 

 involved in the production of gametes 

 A   key 

 B   = yes 

 C   = no 

 D   

**32** In a plant species, the allele for red flowers, R, is dominant to the allele for white flowers, r. Homozygous red-flowered plants, RR, are crossed with homozygous white-flowered plants, rr. 

 What is the colour of the flowers produced by the offspring of this cross? 

 A all red 

 B all white 

 C equal numbers of red and white 

 D three white to one red 

**33** Different organisms have different adaptive features. For example, the anthers of wind-pollinated flowering plants have long filaments. 

 What is true of this adaptive feature? 

 A Filament length is not affected by genes. 

 B It gives the plant an advantage in any environment. 

 C Longer filaments attract more insects. 

 D It makes the plant more likely to reproduce. 

**34** The statements describe aspects of selective breeding and natural selection. 

 Which statement applies only to selective breeding? 

 A Humans select individuals which have desirable features. 

 B Individuals pass their alleles to the next generation. 

 C There may be a large number of offspring produced. 

 D There is variation between individual offspring. 


© UCLES 2019 0610/12/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**35** Which diagram correctly shows the flow of energy? 

 A producers consumers 

 decomposers 

## B 

 C producers consumers 

 decomposers 

 D decomposers consumers producers 

 consumers producers decomposers 

**36** The diagram shows a food chain. 

 Which organism is the secondary consumer? 

 A grass 

## B 

 rabbit 

## C 

 fox 

## D 

 flea 

**37** Which process is part of the carbon cycle? 

 A combustion 

 B evaporation 

 C precipitation 

 D transpiration 

**38** What is an example of genetic engineering? 

 A inserting genes into bacteria 

 B inserting insulin into bacteria 

 C spraying plants with herbicides 

 D using biological washing powders 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2019 0610/12/O/N/19 

**39** What are the possible effects of deforestation? 

 loss of soil flooding decrease in atmospheric carbon dioxide 

 A yes yes no 

 B yes no yes 

 C no yes no 

 D no no yes 

**40** The bloodworm is an organism that is found in heavily polluted water. 

 The diagram shows where raw sewage flows into a river. 

 Where would there be fewest bloodworms? 

 input of raw sewage 

## B 

## A 

## C D 

 direction of flow 


