 This syllabus is regulated for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. 

 IB19 11_0610_22/5RP © UCLES 2019 [Turn over 

# *8028550561* 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## BIOLOGY 0610/22 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) October/November 2019 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2019 0610/22/O/N/19 

**1** The diagrams show a test-tube containing pond water. The green colour is caused by microorganisms that have chloroplasts. 

 pale green pond water 

 light off 

 dark green area 

 light on 

 oxygen bubble 

 Which characteristics of living organisms are shown? 

 A excretion, growth and movement 

 B movement, nutrition and sensitivity 

 C nutrition, reproduction and respiration 

 D reproduction, sensitivity and growth 

**2** Which shows an organism that has been named using the binomial system? 

 A Brown seaweed 

 B Polar bear 

 C Red fox 

 D Vulpes vulpes 

**3** The diagram shows an arthropod. 

 pedipalp 

 legs 

 To which group does it belong? 

 A arachnids 

 B crustaceans 

 C insects 

 D myriapods 


© UCLES 2019 0610/22/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**4** Which features do animal cells share with plant cells? 

 chloroplast cytoplasm nucleus 

 A    key 

 B     = yes 

 C     = no 

 D    

**5** The diagram shows a drawing of a human cheek cell. 

## X Y 

 The distance between points X and Y on the diagram is 30 mm. 

 The actual length of the cell between X and Y was 60 μm. 

 What is the magnification of the cell? 

 A × 50 B × 200 C × 500 D × 2000 

**6** Red blood cells were placed in pure water. 

 Movement of water across the cell membrane caused a change in their appearance. 

 What caused this change in appearance? 

 direction of water movement 

 from higher to lower water potential 

 from lower to higher water potential 

 A into cells yes no 

 B into cells no yes 

 C out of cells yes no 

 D out of cells no yes 

**7** Which process depends on active transport? 

 A absorption of carbon dioxide by plant leaves 

 B reabsorption of glucose by kidney tubules 

 C removal of carbon dioxide in the alveoli 

 D uptake of water by plant roots 


© UCLES 2019 0610/22/O/N/19 

**8** Which identifies the chemical elements found in proteins? 

 carbon hydrogen oxygen nitrogen 

 A     key 

 B     = present 

 C     = absent 

 D     

**9** A student carries out a test to see whether the solution in a test-tube contains protein. 

 Which row shows the correct food test and a positive result? 

 name of test colour seen with a positive result 

 A Benedict’s test blue-black 

 B Benedict’s test purple 

 C biuret test blue-black 

 D biuret test purple 

**10** The diagram shows an experiment investigating the effect of light intensity on an aquatic plant. 

## P Q 

 light source 

 light source 

 20 cm 10 cm 

 Photosynthesis occurred in both test-tube P and test-tube Q. Both test-tubes were kept at the same temperature. The number of bubbles produced in test-tube P was 12 bubbles per minute. 

 What is the most likely number of bubbles produced in one minute in test-tube Q? 

 A 0 B 3 C 12 D 48 


© UCLES 2019 0610/22/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**11** The diagram shows a leaf as seen in cross-section under the microscope. 

## 1 

## 2 

## 3 

 What are tissues 1, 2 and 3? 

## 1 2 3 

 A epidermis palisade mesophyll spongy mesophyll 

 B epidermis spongy mesophyll palisade mesophyll 

 C palisade mesophyll epidermis spongy mesophyll 

 D spongy mesophyll palisade mesophyll epidermis 

**12** The pie charts show the composition of 100 g of four different foods. 

 Which food provides the most energy? 

 key carbohydrate 

 fats and oils 

 protein 

 water 

## A B C D 


© UCLES 2019 0610/22/O/N/19 

**13** The cholera bacterium produces a toxin that results in water entering the alimentary canal and causing diarrhoea. 

 The diagram shows the human alimentary canal. 

 Into which region are chloride ions secreted as a result of the toxin? 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 

**14** The diagram shows an experiment kept at room temperature. 

 tubing containing starch, protease, protein and simple sugars 

 membrane permeable to small molecules only 

 distilled water 

 test-tube 

 What is present in the water surrounding the membrane after 45 minutes? 

 A amino acids and simple sugars 

 B protein and amino acids 

 C protein and simple sugars 

 D starch and simple sugars 


© UCLES 2019 0610/22/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**15** The diagram shows an experiment to investigate transpiration. 

 balance 

 plant 1 plant 2 

 transparent plastic bag 

 Plant 1 is not covered. Plant 2 and its pot are covered by a transparent plastic bag. 

 The mass of each plant and its pot is measured. The masses are measured again after two hours. 

 What is the result? 

 A The mass of both plants decreases by the same percentage. 

 B The mass of both plants stays the same. 

 C The mass of plant 1 decreases more than the mass of plant 2. 

 D The mass of plant 2 decreases more than the mass of plant 1. 

**16** Which description of translocation is correct? 

 A movement of glucose and amino acids from a sink to a source 

 B movement of glucose and amino acids from a source to a sink 

 C movement of sucrose and amino acids from a sink to a source 

 D movement of sucrose and amino acids from a source to a sink 

**17** Which factor increases the risk of developing coronary heart disease? 

 A low fat diet 

 B regular exercise 

 C relaxation 

 D smoking 


© UCLES 2019 0610/22/O/N/19 

**18** Which row describes the features of passive immunity? 

 antibodies made 

 involves memory cells 

 effective period 

 A no no short term 

 B no yes short term 

 C yes no long term 

 D yes yes long term 

**19** The diagram shows part of the human gas exchange system. 

 to P 

## R 

## Q 

 Which row identifies P, Q and R? 

## P Q R 

 A alveolus wall capillary wall vein 

 B bronchiole alveolus wall capillary 

 C capillary layer of moisture bronchiole 

 D alveolus wall bronchiole capillary 

**20** What is the effect on germinating seeds of increasing the temperature from 10 °C to 20 °C? 

 A a decrease in the production of oxygen 

 B a decrease in the respiration rate 

 C an increase in the respiration rate 

 D an increase in the transpiration rate 


© UCLES 2019 0610/22/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**21** Lactic acid builds up in the muscles during vigorous exercise. 

 During recovery, how is this lactic acid removed? 

 A aerobic respiration of lactic acid in the liver 

 B anaerobic respiration of lactic acid in the muscles 

 C excretion of lactic acid by the lungs 

 D removal of lactic acid by the alimentary canal 

**22** Which process transmits an impulse across a synapse? 

 A active transport 

 B diffusion 

 C gravity 

 D osmosis 

**23** The diagram shows the muscles that control the size of the pupil in an eye. 

 radial muscles 

 iris 

 pupil 

 circular muscles 

 How do the muscles make the pupil smaller? 

 circular muscles radial muscles 

 A contract contract 

 B contract relax 

 C relax contract 

 D relax relax 


© UCLES 2019 0610/22/O/N/19 

**24** The diagram shows the shoot and root of a seedling responding to gravity. 

 Which row shows where the auxin accumulates and the effect of this in the shoot? 

 accumulates effect 

 A lower surface inhibits cell elongation 

 B lower surface promotes cell elongation 

 C upper surface inhibits cell division 

 D upper surface promotes cell division 

**25** A patient has dye injected into the blood supply to his kidneys. The dye appears in his excretory system as shown. 

 key 

 dye 

 no dye 

 Which part is blocked? 

 A the kidney 

 B the ureter 

 C the bladder 

 D the urethra 


© UCLES 2019 0610/22/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**26** Bacteria such as MRSA are resistant to antibiotics. 

 These processes can occur in bacteria. 

 1 artificial selection 

 2 genetic variation 

 3 mutation 

 4 natural selection 

 What would contribute to the development of antibiotic resistance? 

 A 1, 2, 3 and 4 

 B 1, 2 and 3 only 

 C 2, 3 and 4 only 

 D 2 and 4 only 

**27** Why do some athletes take anabolic steroids? 

 A to decrease blood glucose concentration 

 B to increase muscle mass 

 C to kill bacteria 

 D to reduce aggression 

**28** In humans, why are sperm cells produced in much greater numbers than egg cells? 

 A Many sperm cells are needed to fertilise an egg cell. 

 B Sperm cells are small in size. 

 C Sperm cells are non-motile. 

 D The chance of one sperm cell reaching an egg is very small. 

**29** There are many reasons why a woman does not become pregnant. 

 What can be treated by a drug that increases the secretion of FSH? 

 A inactive sperm 

 B follicles not developing 

 C thin uterine lining 

 D too few sperm 


© UCLES 2019 0610/22/O/N/19 

**30** The diagram shows the cells of a mammalian embryo shortly after fertilisation. 

 Which is the correct description of these cells? 

 A gametes undergoing meiosis 

 B gametes undergoing mitosis 

 C stem cells undergoing meiosis 

 D stem cells undergoing mitosis 

**31** The diagram shows a diploid cell and alleles **R** and **r** on one pair of chromosomes. 

## R 

 r 

 nucleus 

 cytoplasm 

 When this cell divides by mitosis, which daughter cells will be produced? 

 chromosome number genotype 

 A diploid heterozygous 

 B diploid homozygous 

 C haploid heterozygous 

 D haploid homozygous 


© UCLES 2019 0610/22/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**32** The diagram shows a genetic cross between a male bird with black feathers and a female bird with white feathers. All of the offspring have blue feathers. 

 parents F BF B^ × FW^ FW black white 

 offspring F BFW 100% blue 

 Two of the blue offspring are crossed. 

 Which row shows the correct phenotype percentages for the cross? 

 percentage black 

 percentage blue 

 percentage white 

 A 25 75 0 

 B 25 50 25 

 C 50 20 25 

 D 75 0 25 

**33** What is a feature of some xerophytes? 

 A large air spaces in the tissues 

 B leaves rolled up and covered with hairs 

 C leaves with stomata on the upper surface 

 D thin cuticle 

**34** The diagram shows a pyramid of biomass. 

## X 

 Which organisms are found in position X? 

 A decomposers 

 B herbivores 

 C primary consumers 

 D producers 


© UCLES 2019 0610/22/O/N/19 

**35** What is a trophic level? 

 A a group of interconnected food chains 

 B all of the consumers in an ecosystem 

 C an organism’s position in a food web 

 D the transfer of energy between organisms 

**36** The diagram shows part of the nitrogen cycle. 

 At which stage is denitrification occurring? 

 nitrogen in the atmosphere 

 nitrogen in plants 

 animals nitrates 

 nitrites ammonium compounds 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 

**37** Which structures found in bacteria make bacteria useful in genetic engineering? 

 A cell walls 

 B membranes 

 C nuclei 

 D plasmids 

**38** Which chemical reaction is catalysed by maltase? 

 A glycogen → glucose + maltose 

 B maltose → glucose + glucose 

 C maltose → starch 

 D starch → glucose + maltose 


© UCLES 2019 0610/22/O/N/19 

**39** What are the possible effects of deforestation? 

 loss of soil flooding decrease in atmospheric carbon dioxide 

 A yes yes no 

 B yes no yes 

 C no yes no 

 D no no yes 

**40** The bloodworm is an organism that is found in heavily polluted water. 

 The diagram shows where raw sewage flows into a river. 

 Where would there be fewest bloodworms? 

 input of raw sewage 

## B 

## A 

## C D 

 direction of flow 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2019 0610/22/O/N/19 

## BLANK PAGE 


