 This syllabus is regulated for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. 

 IB19 11_0610_21/4RP © UCLES 2019 [Turn over 

# *7538671578* 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## BIOLOGY 0610/21 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) October/November 2019 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2019 0610/21/O/N/19 

**1** The diagram shows a plant. 

 light 

 Which characteristic of living organisms is shown by the plant in the diagram? 

 A excretion 

 B reproduction 

 C respiration 

 D sensitivity 

**2** Using the binomial system of naming organisms, the name of the lion is _Panthera leo_. 

 Which statement is correct? 

 A The lion belongs to the kingdom Panthera. 

 B The lion belongs to the genus Panthera. 

 C The lion belongs to the species Panthera. 

 D The lion belongs to the genus leo. 

**3** The table shows the number of animals collected in a sample from a woodland and the groups to which they belong. 

 animal group number in sample 

 arachnids 10 

 crustaceans 8 

 insects 80 

 myriapods 7 

 How many arthropods in total, in this sample, have six or eight legs? 

 A 15 B 88 C 90 D 98 


© UCLES 2019 0610/21/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**4** Which features do animal cells share with plant cells? 

 chloroplast cytoplasm nucleus 

 A    key 

 B     = yes 

 C     = no 

 D    

**5** The diagram shows a cell with an actual size of 30 μm. 

 30 mm 

 What is the magnification of the diagram? 

 A × 10 B × 100 C × 1000 D × 10 000 

**6** Red blood cells were placed in pure water. 

 Movement of water across the cell membrane caused a change in their appearance. 

 What caused this change in appearance? 

 direction of water movement 

 from higher to lower water potential 

 from lower to higher water potential 

 A into cells yes no 

 B into cells no yes 

 C out of cells yes no 

 D out of cells no yes 


© UCLES 2019 0610/21/O/N/19 

**7** Some examples of substances moving across membranes are listed. 

 1 glucose molecules into the epithelium that lines the small intestine 

 2 nitrate ions from a dilute solution in soil into a more concentrated solution in root hair cells 

 3 water molecules from mesophyll cells into the air spaces of a leaf 

 For which must oxygen be present? 

 A 1, 2 and 3 B 1 and 2 only C 1 and 3 only D 2 and 3 only 

**8** Which identifies the chemical elements found in proteins? 

 carbon hydrogen oxygen nitrogen 

 A     key 

 B     = present 

 C     = absent 

 D     

**9** What is the correct definition of the term _enzyme_? 

 A carbohydrates that act as biological catalysts 

 B carbohydrates that act as substrates 

 C proteins that act as biological catalysts 

 D proteins that act as substrates 


© UCLES 2019 0610/21/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**10** Two sealed test-tubes containing aquatic plants and hydrogencarbonate indicator were set up. 

 hydrogencarbonate indicator 

 aquatic plant 

 stopper 

 The indicator in the sealed test-tubes shows the concentration of dissolved carbon dioxide present. 

 concentration of carbon dioxide 

 colour of indicator 

 low red 

 medium orange 

 high yellow 

 One of the sealed test-tubes was kept in the light for 24 hours and one of the sealed test-tubes was kept in the dark for 24 hours. 

 The results are shown in the table. 

 test-tube kept in start colour^ end colour 

 light orange red 

 dark orange yellow 

 What is the correct explanation of what has taken place? 

 A Photosynthesis and respiration both occur in the light, but the rate of photosynthesis is higher. 

 B Photosynthesis occurs in the light, but respiration does not. 

 C Respiration can only occur when photosynthesis is not taking place. 

 D The amount of carbon dioxide used and produced in the light is equal. 


© UCLES 2019 0610/21/O/N/19 

**11** The diagram shows a leaf as seen in cross-section under the microscope. 

## 1 

## 2 

## 3 

 What are tissues 1, 2 and 3? 

## 1 2 3 

 A epidermis palisade mesophyll spongy mesophyll 

 B epidermis spongy mesophyll palisade mesophyll 

 C palisade mesophyll epidermis spongy mesophyll 

 D spongy mesophyll palisade mesophyll epidermis 

**12** The pie charts show the composition of 100 g of four different foods. 

 Which food provides the most energy? 

 key carbohydrate 

 fats and oils 

 protein 

 water 

## A B C D 

**13** One of the symptoms of the disease cholera is diarrhoea. This is due to water loss by osmosis caused by the cholera toxin. 

 Cholera toxins result in 

 A secretion of chloride ions out of the small intestine lowering the water potential. 

 B secretion of chloride ions out of the small intestine raising the water potential. 

 C secretion of chloride ions into the small intestine lowering the water potential. 

 D secretion of chloride ions into the small intestine raising the water potential. 


© UCLES 2019 0610/21/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**14** The diagram shows an experiment kept at room temperature. 

 tubing containing starch, protease, protein and simple sugars 

 membrane permeable to small molecules only 

 distilled water 

 test-tube 

 What is present in the water surrounding the membrane after 45 minutes? 

 A amino acids and simple sugars 

 B protein and amino acids 

 C protein and simple sugars 

 D starch and simple sugars 

**15** What is an example of diffusion? 

 A dust particles being moved by ciliated cells in the trachea 

 B oxygen molecules moving into a red blood cell in the lungs 

 C pollen grains moving from anthers to stigmas in the wind 

 D red blood cells moving in a blood capillary in a muscle 

**16** In plants, what is transported by translocation? 

 A glucagon 

 B glycogen 

 C starch 

 D sucrose 


© UCLES 2019 0610/21/O/N/19 

**17** The diagram shows human blood cells, as seen under a microscope. 

## X 

 What is the function of cell X? 

 A to carry glucose 

 B to carry oxygen 

 C to defend against disease 

 D to make the blood clot 

**18** Which row describes the features of passive immunity? 

 antibodies made 

 involves memory cells 

 effective period 

 A no no short term 

 B no yes short term 

 C yes no long term 

 D yes yes long term 

**19** Which row shows the approximate percentage of gases in expired air? 

 percentage of carbon dioxide 

 percentage of oxygen 

 A 12 9 

 B 4 16 

 C 24 24 

 D 27 20 

**20** What is the correct equation for aerobic respiration? 

 A 6CO 2 + 6H 2 O → C 6 H 12 O 6 + 6O 2 

 B C 6 H 12 O 6 + 6CO 2 → 6O 2 + 6H 2 O 

 C C 6 H 12 O 6 + O 2 → CO 2 + H 2 O 

 D C 6 H 12 O 6 + 6O 2 → 6CO 2 + 6H 2 O 


© UCLES 2019 0610/21/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**21** Lactic acid builds up in the muscles during vigorous exercise. 

 During recovery, how is this lactic acid removed? 

 A aerobic respiration of lactic acid in the liver 

 B anaerobic respiration of lactic acid in the muscles 

 C excretion of lactic acid by the lungs 

 D removal of lactic acid by the alimentary canal 

**22** The neurones at synapses contain vesicles. 

 Which type of substance is found inside the vesicles? 

 A enzyme 

 B chromosomes 

 C neurotransmitter 

 D steroid 

**23** The diagram shows the muscles that control the size of the pupil in an eye. 

 radial muscles 

 iris 

 pupil 

 circular muscles 

 How do the muscles make the pupil smaller? 

 circular muscles radial muscles 

 A contract contract 

 B contract relax 

 C relax contract 

 D relax relax 


© UCLES 2019 0610/21/O/N/19 

**24** More adrenaline is produced by the adrenal glands when a person is frightened. 

 This increase affects several parts of the body. 

 change increases decreases 

 1 blood glucose concentration   key 

 2 heart rate   = yes 

 3 breathing rate and depth   = no 

 4 dilation of pupil   

 Which rows are correct? 

 A 1 and 3 B 1 and 4 C 2 and 3 D 2 and 4 

**25** A patient has dye injected into the blood supply to his kidneys. The dye appears in his excretory system as shown. 

 key dye 

 no dye 

 Which part is blocked? 

 A the kidney 

 B the ureter 

 C the bladder 

 D the urethra 


© UCLES 2019 0610/21/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**26** Which statement is a reason why viruses are unharmed by antibiotics such as penicillin? 

 A They are very small in size. 

 B They do not have a cell wall. 

 C They have genetic material. 

 D They have a protein coat. 

**27** Several athletes have been banned from their sport for using the drug nandrolone. This drug helps the body to build up muscle tissue. 

 What sort of drug is nandrolone? 

 A anabolic steroid 

 B antibiotic 

 C depressant 

 D neurotransmitter 

**28** Which statement about the hormone FSH is correct? 

 A It stimulates ovulation. 

 B It stimulates ovulation and menstruation. 

 C It stimulates the maturation of follicles. 

 D It stimulates the maturation of follicles and menstruation. 

**29** HIV is transmitted by body fluids during sexual contact. 

 HIV affects the immune system. 

 Which statement best describes the effect of HIV? 

 A The body has increased immunity. 

 B The body produces fewer antibodies. 

 C The body produces more antibodies. 

 D The number of lymphocytes increases. 


© UCLES 2019 0610/21/O/N/19 

**30** How many chromosomes are there in each of the human cells shown in the table? 

goblet cell (^) neuronemotor mature redblood cell sperm 

## A 0 23 0 0 

## B 23 23 23 0 

## C 46 46 0 23 

## D 46 46 46 23 

**31** The diagram shows a diploid cell and alleles **R** and **r** on one pair of chromosomes. 

## R 

 r 

 nucleus 

 cytoplasm 

 When this cell divides by mitosis, which daughter cells will be produced? 

 chromosome number genotype 

 A diploid heterozygous 

 B diploid homozygous 

 C haploid heterozygous 

 D haploid homozygous 

**32** The diagram shows breeding rats where the allele for grey fur is dominant to white fur. 

## 1 2 3 4 

## × × 

## 5 6 

 Which two individuals are definitely heterozygous for fur colour? 

 A 1 and 4 B 2 and 3 C 2 and 5 D 3 and 6 


© UCLES 2019 0610/21/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**33** The diagram shows a hydrophyte in a lake. 

 surface of water 

 Which statement about the leaves is correct? 

 A They cannot photosynthesise. 

 B They have a thick cuticle. 

 C They have large air spaces in the spongy mesophyll. 

 D They require many xylem vessels for support. 

**34** Some disease-causing bacteria survive treatment with an antibiotic. 

 Which statement about the surviving bacteria is correct? 

 A The antibiotic will work better on the next generation of bacteria. 

 B The bacteria have undergone a process of natural selection. 

 C The bacteria will now be resistant to all antibiotics. 

 D The resistance of the bacteria is a result of selective breeding. 

**35** Which row describes the energy flow into and through a food chain that starts with a plant? 

 energy entering a food chain 

 energy transferred between organisms in a food chain 

 A chemical chemical 

 B chemical heat 

 C light chemical 

 D light heat 


© UCLES 2019 0610/21/O/N/19 

**36** The diagram shows part of the nitrogen cycle. 

 mineral ions 

 animals 

 decomposers plants 

 What is one of the mineral ions? 

 A amino acids 

 B nitrate 

 C nitrogen 

 D protein 

**37** Which part of a bacterial cell makes it useful in genetic engineering? 

 A cell wall 

 B cytoplasm 

 C flagellum 

 D plasmid 

**38** Which enzyme would be used in a biological washing powder? 

 A DNA ligase 

 B lactase 

 C pectinase 

 D protease 

**39** What are the possible effects of deforestation? 

 loss of soil flooding decrease in atmosphericcarbon dioxide 

 A yes yes no 

 B yes no yes 

 C no yes no 

 D no no yes 


© UCLES 2019 0610/21/O/N/19 

**40** The bloodworm is an organism that is found in heavily polluted water. 

 The diagram shows where raw sewage flows into a river. 

 Where would there be fewest bloodworms? 

 input of raw sewage 

## B 

## A 

## C D 

 direction of flow 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2019 0610/21/O/N/19 

## BLANK PAGE 


