 This syllabus is regulated for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 17 printed pages and 3 blank pages. 

 IB19 11_0610_11/4RP © UCLES 2019 [Turn over 

# *3567302215* 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## BIOLOGY 0610/11 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) October/November 2019 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2019 0610/11/O/N/19 

**1** The diagram shows a plant. 

 light 

 Which characteristic of living organisms is shown by the plant in the diagram? 

 A excretion 

 B reproduction 

 C respiration 

 D sensitivity 

**2** Using the binomial system of naming organisms, the name of the lion is _Panthera leo_. 

 Which statement is correct? 

 A The lion belongs to the kingdom Panthera. 

 B The lion belongs to the genus Panthera. 

 C The lion belongs to the species Panthera. 

 D The lion belongs to the genus leo. 

**3** The table shows the number of animals collected in a sample from a woodland and the groups to which they belong. 

 animal group number in sample 

 arachnids 10 

 crustaceans 8 

 insects 80 

 myriapods 7 

 How many arthropods in total, in this sample, have six or eight legs? 

 A 15 B 88 C 90 D 98 


© UCLES 2019 0610/11/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**4** Which features do animal cells share with plant cells? 

 chloroplast cytoplasm nucleus 

 A    key 

 B     = yes 

 C     = no 

 D    

**5** The diagram shows an animal. 

 Use the key to identify the animal. 

 1 wings present ........................................ go to 2 

 wings absent ......................................... go to 3 

 2 one pair of wings visible ........................ A 

 two pairs of wings visible ....................... B 

 3 three pairs of legs .................................. C 

 four pairs of legs .................................... D 

**6** At which level of organisation is a root? 

 A organ 

 B organ system 

 C organism 

 D tissue 

**7** What is an example of diffusion? 

 A dust particles being moved by ciliated cells in the trachea 

 B oxygen molecules moving into a red blood cell in the lungs 

 C pollen grains moving from anthers to stigmas in the wind 

 D red blood cells moving in a blood capillary in a muscle 


© UCLES 2019 0610/11/O/N/19 

**8** Which identifies the chemical elements found in proteins? 

 carbon hydrogen oxygen nitrogen 

 A     key 

 B     = present 

 C     = absent 

 D     

**9** What is the correct definition of the term _enzyme_? 

 A carbohydrates that act as biological catalysts 

 B carbohydrates that act as substrates 

 C proteins that act as biological catalysts 

 D proteins that act as substrates 


© UCLES 2019 0610/11/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**10** Two sealed test-tubes containing aquatic plants and hydrogencarbonate indicator were set up. 

 hydrogencarbonate indicator 

 aquatic plant 

 stopper 

 The indicator in the sealed test-tubes shows the concentration of dissolved carbon dioxide present. 

 concentration of carbon dioxide 

 colour of indicator 

 low red 

 medium orange 

 high yellow 

 One of the sealed test-tubes was kept in the light for 24 hours and one of the sealed test-tubes was kept in the dark for 24 hours. 

 The results are shown in the table. 

 test-tube kept in start colour^ end colour 

 light orange red 

 dark orange yellow 

 What is the correct explanation of what has taken place? 

 A Photosynthesis and respiration both occur in the light, but the rate of photosynthesis is higher. 

 B Photosynthesis occurs in the light, but respiration does not. 

 C Respiration can only occur when photosynthesis is not taking place. 

 D The amount of carbon dioxide used and produced in the light is equal. 


© UCLES 2019 0610/11/O/N/19 

**11** The diagram shows a leaf as seen in cross-section under the microscope. 

## 1 

## 2 

## 3 

 What are tissues 1, 2 and 3? 

## 1 2 3 

 A epidermis palisade mesophyll spongy mesophyll 

 B epidermis spongy mesophyll palisade mesophyll 

 C palisade mesophyll epidermis spongy mesophyll 

 D spongy mesophyll palisade mesophyll epidermis 

**12** The pie charts show the composition of 100 g of four different foods. 

 Which food provides the most energy? 

 key carbohydrate 

 fats and oils 

 protein 

 water 

## A B C D 


© UCLES 2019 0610/11/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**13** The diagram shows the teeth of the lower jaw of a human. 

 Which tooth is a premolar? 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 

**14** The diagram shows an experiment kept at room temperature. 

 tubing containing starch, protease, protein and simple sugars 

 membrane permeable to small molecules only 

 distilled water 

 test-tube 

 What is present in the water surrounding the membrane after 45 minutes? 

 A amino acids and simple sugars 

 B protein and amino acids 

 C protein and simple sugars 

 D starch and simple sugars 


© UCLES 2019 0610/11/O/N/19 

**15** The diagrams show cross-sections through four roots. 

 Which root is best adapted for absorbing water from the soil? 

 A B C D 

**16** The diagram shows a vertical section through a human heart. 

## Y 

## X 

 What are X and Y? 

## X Y 

 A left atrium right ventricle 

 B left ventricle right atrium 

 C right atrium left ventricle 

 D right ventricle left atrium 


© UCLES 2019 0610/11/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**17** The diagram shows human blood cells, as seen under a microscope. 

## X 

 What is the function of cell X? 

 A to carry glucose 

 B to carry oxygen 

 C to defend against disease 

 D to make the blood clot 

**18** A pathogen is defined as 

 A a contaminated surface or food. 

 B a disease-causing organism. 

 C a transmissible disease. 

 D a virus. 

**19** Which row shows the approximate percentage of gases in expired air? 

 percentage of carbon dioxide 

 percentage of oxygen 

 A 12 9 

 B 4 16 

 C 24 24 

 D 27 20 

**20** Mammals maintain a constant body temperature. 

 What process must occur continuously to maintain a constant body temperature? 

 A excretion 

 B respiration 

 C shivering 

 D sweating 


© UCLES 2019 0610/11/O/N/19 

**21** Which process releases the most energy from one molecule of glucose? 

 A aerobic respiration 

 B anaerobic respiration in muscle 

 C anaerobic respiration in yeast 

 D photosynthesis 

**22** The diagram shows a simple reflex arc. 

## 1 

 motor neurone activated 

## 2 

 sensory neurone activated 

## 3 

 muscle stimulated 4 receptor stimulated 

 knee tapped here 

 What is the correct order of events after the knee is tapped? 

 A 1 → 2 → 3 → 4 

 B 1 → 4 → 2 → 3 

 C 4 → 2 → 1 → 3 

 D 4 → 3 → 2 → 1 

**23** Which type of cell is found in sense organs? 

 A ciliated 

 B effector 

 C receptor 

 D palisade 


© UCLES 2019 0610/11/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**24** What is meant by the term _tropism_? 

 A absorption of light by chlorophyll 

 B growth of parts of a plant towards or away from a stimulus 

 C growth of seed into a small plant 

 D level at which an organism feeds in a food chain 

**25** A patient has dye injected into the blood supply to his kidneys. The dye appears in his excretory system as shown. 

 key 

 dye 

 no dye 

 Which part is blocked? 

 A the kidney 

 B the ureter 

 C the bladder 

 D the urethra 


© UCLES 2019 0610/11/O/N/19 

**26** The diagram shows the effect of four different antibiotics, A, B, C and D, on the growth of bacteria. 

 Which antibiotic are the bacteria most resistant to? 

 A B 

## D C 

 key antibiotic present 

 bacteria present 

 no bacteria present 

**27** Excess alcohol affects the body. 

 Which statement explains the risk of driving after consuming excessive alcohol? 

 A Alcohol can be addictive. 

 B Alcohol causes liver damage. 

 C Alcohol slows down reaction times. 

 D Alcohol speeds up reaction times. 

**28** To which part of the flower is pollen transferred in pollination? 

 A anther 

 B petal 

 C sepal 

 D stigma 


© UCLES 2019 0610/11/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**29** The table shows some of the stages that happen during labour and birth. 

 What is the correct order? 

## A 

 amniotic sac breaks 

## → 

 cutting umbilical cord 

## → 

 cervix fully dilated 

→ (^) deliveredafterbirth → passage through vagina 

## B 

 amniotic sac breaks 

## → 

 cervix fully dilated 

## → 

 passage through vagina 

## → 

 cutting umbilical cord 

## → 

 afterbirth delivered 

## C 

 cervix fully dilated 

## → 

 amniotic sac breaks 

## → 

 cutting umbilical cord 

## → 

 passage through vagina 

## → 

 afterbirth delivered 

## D 

 afterbirth delivered → 

 cervix fully dilated 

## → 

 cutting umbilical cord 

## → 

 amniotic sac breaks 

## → 

 passage through vagina 

**30** The table shows the percentage effectiveness of four methods of contraception when used correctly. 

 method percentage effectiveness 

 male condom 98 

 diaphragm 94 

 femidom 95 

 vasectomy 99 

 What would be the expected percentage of unplanned pregnancies if the surgical method of contraception was used? 

 A 1% B 2% C 5% D 6% 


© UCLES 2019 0610/11/O/N/19 

**31** The diagram shows part of a genetic diagram for the inheritance of sex in humans. 

 parents 

 gametes 

 offspring male female 

 father mother 

## P 

 What are the sex chromosomes in gamete P and the male offspring? 

## P 

 male offspring 

 A X XX 

 B X XY 

 C Y XX 

 D Y XY 

**32** A mouse with grey hair breeds with a mouse with white hair, producing offspring with genotypes Bb, Bb, bb and bb. (B represents the dominant allele for grey hair, and b represents the recessive allele for white hair.) 

 Which correctly describes the genotypes of the parents? 

 A both heterozygous 

 B both homozygous dominant 

 C one heterozygous and one homozygous dominant 

 D one heterozygous and one homozygous recessive 


© UCLES 2019 0610/11/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**33** The following features were observed in a pair of identical twins. 

 feature twin 1 twin 2 

 tongue rolling yes yes 

 eye colour brown brown 

 lobed ears yes yes 

 weight 60 kg 65 kg 

 hair length short long 

 Which features show phenotypic variation? 

 A eye colour and weight 

 B lobed ears and hair length 

 C tongue rolling and lobed ears 

 D weight and hair length 

**34** Which statement about selective breeding is correct? 

 A The inheritance of alleles is not involved. 

 B Only individuals better adapted to the environment will survive. 

 C Individuals are crossed to produce the next generation. 

 D There is competition for resources. 


© UCLES 2019 0610/11/O/N/19 

**35** Which diagram shows energy passing along a food chain? 

 producer primary consumer 

 secondary consumer 

 tertiary consumer 

## A 

## B 

 producer primary consumer 

 secondary consumer 

 tertiary consumer 

## C 

 producer 

 primary consumer secondary consumer tertiary consumer 

## D 

 producer 

 primary consumer secondary consumer tertiary consumer 

**36** Which organisms remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere? 

 A consumers 

 B decomposers 

 C herbivores 

 D producers 

**37** Which feature of bacteria makes them especially useful in biotechnology? 

 A They are often pathogens. 

 B They have a unique genetic code. 

 C They have cell walls. 

 D They reproduce rapidly. 


© UCLES 2019 0610/11/O/N/19 

**38** Which process makes use of a genetically engineered organism? 

 A using bacteria to produce insulin 

 B using enzymes in biological washing powders 

 C using pectinase in fruit juice production 

 D using yeast to produce ethanol 

**39** What are the possible effects of deforestation? 

 loss of soil flooding decrease in atmosphericcarbon dioxide 

 A yes yes no 

 B yes no yes 

 C no yes no 

 D no no yes 

**40** The bloodworm is an organism that is found in heavily polluted water. 

 The diagram shows where raw sewage flows into a river. 

 Where would there be fewest bloodworms? 

 input of raw sewage 

## B 

## A 

## C D 

 direction of flow 


© UCLES 2019 0610/11/O/N/19 

## BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2019 0610/11/O/N/19 

## BLANK PAGE 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2019 0610/11/O/N/19 

## BLANK PAGE 


