 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 18 printed pages and 2 blank pages. IB17 11_0625_22/4RP© UCLES 2017 [Turn over 

## *2664559192* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

### PHYSICS 0625/22 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) October/November 2017 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer SheetSoft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB recommended) READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid.Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you.DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. There areanswers A forty , B , C questions on this paper. Answerand D. all questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet.Electronic calculators may be used. Take the weight of 1.0 kg to be 10 N (acceleration of free fall = 10 m / s 2 ). 


© UCLES 2017 0625/22/O/N/17 

**1** A student investigates the rate of flow of oil through a funnel. The diagrams show the experiment and the volume of oil in the measuring cylinder at the start of the experiment, and one minute later. 

 80 

 60 

 40 

 20 

 cm 3 

### 80 

### 60 

### 40 

### 20 

 cm^3 

 initial measurement 

 after 1.0 minute What is the rate of flow of oil through the funnel during the one minute? A 0.73 cm^3 / s B 0.80 cm^3 / s C 44 cm^3 / s D 48 cm^3 / s 

**2** Four balls with different masses are dropped simultaneously from the heights shown. Air resistance may be ignored. Which ball hits the floor last? 

 1.0 kg 

### A 

 0.5 m 

 2.0 kg 

### B 

 1.0 m 

 3.0 kg 

### C 

 1.5 m 

 4.0 kg 

### D 

 2.0 m 

 ground 


© UCLES 2017 0625/22/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**3** The gravitational field strength on the Earth is greater than the gravitational field strength on theMoon. The Earth has an atmosphere, but the Moon does not. 

 Which speed-time graph represents the motion of a light ball dropped from a great height nearthe surface of the Earth and near the surface of the Moon? 

(^00) speed time 

### A 

 Earth 

 Moon 

(^00) speed time 

### B 

 Earth 

 Moon 

(^00) speed time 

### C 

 Earth 

 Moon 

(^00) speed time 

### D 

 Earth 

 Moon 

**4** A spring is stretched by hanging a piece of metal from it. 

 spring 

 metal Which name is given to the force that stretches the spring? A friction B mass C pressure D weight 


© UCLES 2017 0625/22/O/N/17 

**5** A body of mass _m_ has a weight _W_ in a location where the gravitational field strength is _g_. Which statement about these quantities is correct? **A** _m_ and _W_ are both forces. **B** _m_ and _W_ are both vector quantities. **C** _m_ and _W_ are related by the equation _Wm_^ = _g_. **D** _m_ and _W_ have the same unit. 

**6** An object is pivoted at point P. A student ties a length of string to a peg on the object. He pullsthe string with a force _F_. 

 q P 

 r 

 s t 

### F 

 object 

 string 

 peg 

 What is the moment of the force F about the point P? A F × q B F × r C F × s D F × t 

**7** Each diagram shows a metal plate with four parallel forces acting on it. These are the only forcesacting on the plates. 

 In which diagram is the plate in equilibrium? A 1.0 N 

 2.0 N 

### 2.0 N 

### 1.0 N 

### B 

### 2.0 N 

### 1.0 N 

### 1.0 N 

### 2.0 N 

### C 

### 1.0 N 

### 2.0 N 

### 1.0 N 

### 2.0 N 

### D 

### 2.0 N 

### 2.0 N 

### 1.0 N 

### 2.0 N 


© UCLES 2017 0625/22/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**8** The diagram shows an incomplete scale drawing to find the resultant of two 10a point in the directions shown. N forces acting at 

### 10 N 

### 10 N 

 What is the magnitude of the resultant force? A 7.5 N B 8.6 N C 18 N D 20 N 

**9** A ball has a mass of 0.30 kg. It moves horizontally with a speed of 3.0 m / s in the direction shown. The ball hits a wall. 

 before hitting the wall 

 3.0 m / s 

 after hitting the wall 

 2.0 m / s 

 wall ball 

 wall ball 

 The ball rebounds from the wall with a horizontal speed of 2.0 m / s. What is the change in momentum of the ball? A 0.30 kg m / s B 1.0 kg m / s C 1.5 kg m / s D 5.0 kg m / s 

**10** An object has a mass of 500 kg. It moves with a speed of 30 m / s. What is its kinetic energy? **A** 7.5 kJ **B** 15 kJ **C** 225 kJ **D** 450 kJ 


© UCLES 2017 0625/22/O/N/17 

**11** Different processes have different efficiencies. Which row shows the most efficient process? energy input / J 

 useful energy output / J A 10 3 B 40 10 C 100 25 D 2000 250 

**12** A student runs up a flight of stairs. 

 length height 

 Which information is not needed to calculate the rate at which the student is doing work against gravity? A the height of the flight of stairs B the length of the flight of stairs C the time taken to run up the stairs D the weight of the student 


© UCLES 2017 0625/22/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**13** The diagram shows a simple mercury barometer. 

 90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 

cm (^) vacuum metre rule mercury Which length is used to find the value of atmospheric pressure? **A** 12 cm **B** 74 cm **C** 86 cm **D** 100 cm **14** A pollen grain in a beaker of still water is viewed through a microscope. Which diagram shows the most likely movement of the pollen grain? **A B C D** 


© UCLES 2017 0625/22/O/N/17 

**15** The diagram shows an air-filled rubber toy. A child sits on the toy and its volume decreases. The temperature of the air in the toy does not change. 

 How does the air pressure in the toy change and why? pressure reason A decreases air molecules move more slowly B decreases air molecules strike the rubber less frequently C increases air molecules move more quickly D increases air molecules strike the rubber more frequently 

**16** The diagram shows a glass flask, sealed with a small volume of mercury in a glass tube. Whenthe flask is gently warmed the mercury rises up the tube. 

 air 

 water 

 mercury 

 glass tube 

 What is the main cause of the movement of the mercury? A expansion of air in the flask B expansion of the glass flask C expansion of the glass tube D expansion of the mercury 


© UCLES 2017 0625/22/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**17** Which row identifies the fixed points on the Celsius scale? 

 lower fixed point upper fixed point A boiling point of mercury melting point of pure ice B boiling point of pure water melting point of pure ice C melting point of mercury boiling point of pure water D melting point of pure ice boiling point of pure water 

**18** Aluminium has a specific heat capacity of 900 J / (kg °C). The internal energy of a 2.0 kg block of aluminium increases by 13 500 J. By how much does the temperature of the block increase? **A** 0.067 °C **B** 0.13 °C **C** 7.5 °C **D** 15 °C 

**19** Why does a balloon filled with hot air rise? **A** Cold air is less dense than hot air. **B** Cold air is more dense than hot air. **C** Heat rises. **D** The density of the balloon is greater than the density of the surrounding gas. 


© UCLES 2017 0625/22/O/N/17 

**20** The diagram represents plane wavefronts of a water wave about to strike a solid barrier. 

 wavefronts 

 Which diagram shows the position of the wavefronts after reflection at the barrier? 

 reflected 

### A 

 reflected 

### B 

 reflected 

### C 

 reflected 

### D 


© UCLES 2017 0625/22/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**21** The diagram shows an object O in front of a thin converging lens of focal length _f_. At which point will the lens form a sharp image of the object? 

 f f 

### A 

### B 

### C 

### D 

### O 

**22** The diagram shows a ray of light incident on the surface of a rectangular glass block at 90° to the surface. ray of light 

 glass block 

 Which quantities remain unchanged as the light enters the glass block? A direction and frequency B direction and speed C frequency and speed D speed and wavelength 

**23** Which piece of equipment is designed to produce a type of electromagnetic wave? **A** electric fire **B** electric generator **C** electric motor **D** electromagnet 

**24** The Moon is 380 000 km from the Earth. A laser light beam is directed from the Earth to the Moon. The beam is reflected back to the Earth. How long does it take for the light to travel to the Moon and back to the Earth? **A** 1.27 ms **B** 2.53 ms **C** 1.27 s **D** 2.53 s 


© UCLES 2017 0625/22/O/N/17 

**25** Different waves travel through air. Which waves have the greatest difference in speed? **A** ultrasound waves and sound waves **B** ultrasound waves and ultraviolet waves **C** ultraviolet waves and light waves **D** ultraviolet waves and radio waves 

**26** The speed of sound is different in different states of matter. The speed of sound in water is 1500 m / s. Which row correctly compares the speed of sound in ice and the speed of sound in steam with the speed of sound in water? speed of sound in icem / s speed of sound in steamm / s **A** less than 1500 less than 1500 **B** less than 1500 more than 1500 **C** more than 1500 less than 1500 **D** more than 1500 more than 1500 

**27** A student finds that it takes sound 0.33 seconds to travel 100 metres. From this information, what is the speed of sound? **A** 30 m / s **B** 60 m / s **C** 300 m / s **D** 600 m / s 


© UCLES 2017 0625/22/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**28** A train of steel nails and a train of iron nails hang from a strong magnet. 

 magnet train of steel nails 

 train of iron nails 

 The trains are then carefully removed from the magnet. What happens to the trains? A Both trains fall apart. B Both trains stay together. C Only the train of iron nails falls apart. D Only the train of steel nails falls apart. 

**29** An old and expensive steel watch becomes magnetised. The owner wants to use the watch again. He must demagnetise the watch. What is the **best** method to do this? **A** Insert the watch in a solenoid that carries alternating current and then slowly remove it. **B** Insert the watch in a solenoid that carries direct current and then slowly remove it. **C** Pass alternating current through the watch. **D** Pass direct current through the watch. 

**30** Which diagram represents the electric field due to a negatively-charged conducting sphere? **A** 

### – – – – 

### B C D 


© UCLES 2017 0625/22/O/N/17 

**31** The diagram shows a circuit with a gap between points P and Q. Four pieces of metal wire of the same material are connected, in turn, between points P and Q in the circuit. 

### A 

### P Q 

 The table gives the diameters and lengths of the wires. In which wire is the current the largest? diameter /^ mm^ length^ /^ m A 0.10 1.0 B 0.10 2.0 C 0.20 1.0 D 0.20 2.0 

**32** The graph shows the way in which one physical quantity _y_ varies with another physical quantity _x_. 

(^00) _y x_ Which row gives suitable quantities for _y_ and _x_? _y x_ **A** the number of atoms of a radioactive isotope present the time taken **B** the potential difference across a metallic conductor the current in the metallic conductor **C** the resistance of a length of wire the diameter of the wire **D** the volume of a 1.0 kg object the density of the material from which the object is made 


© UCLES 2017 0625/22/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**33** The potential difference across a car headlamp is 12 V. The current in the lamp is 2.5 A. How much energy is transferred by the lamp in 1.0 hour? **A** 1800 J **B** 1800 W **C** 108 000 J **D** 108 000 W 

**34** The diagram shows a circuit with a fixed resistor connected in series with a thermistor and an ammeter. A 

 Which row shows how temperature change affects the resistance of the thermistor and the current in the circuit? temperature resistance ofthermistor current in circuit A decreases decreases increases B decreases increases decreases C increases decreases decreases D increases increases increases 


© UCLES 2017 0625/22/O/N/17 

**35** An incomplete truth table for a NAND gate is shown. 

 input P input Q output 0 0 W 0 1 X 1 0 Y 1 1 Z What are the values of W, X, Y and Z? W X Y Z A 0 0 0 1 B 0 1 1 1 C 1 0 0 0 D 1 1 1 0 

**36** The diagram shows a wire hanging freely between the poles of a magnet. There is a current inthe wire in the direction shown. 

# S N 

 current 

 wire 

 The magnet and current cause a force to act on the wire. In which direction does this force act? A into the page (away from you) B out of the page (toward you) C to the left D to the right 


© UCLES 2017 0625/22/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**37** A 100% efficient transformer has 6000 turns on its primary coil and 600 turns on its secondarycoil. The output voltage of the transformer is 12 V. 

 A resistor is connected across the secondary coil and dissipates 24 W of power. primary coil 6000 turns 

 secondary coil 600 turns 

 output voltage 12 V power 24 W 

 What is the current in the primary coil of the transformer? A 0.050 A B 0.20 A C 5.0 A D 20 A 

**38** In the diagram, the circle represents an atom (not to scale) with the nucleus at its centre. A particle is emitted by a radioactive source and approaches the nucleus of the atom. The curved arrow shows the path of the particle. 

 path of particle 

 nucleus 

 What is the nature and charge of the particle? nature of particle charge of particle A α-particle negative B α-particle positive C β-particle negative D β-particle positive 


© UCLES 2017 0625/22/O/N/17 

**39** Which row describes the behaviour of γ-rays in an electric field and in a magnetic field? 

 electric field magnetic field A deflected deflected B deflected undeflected C undeflected deflected D undeflected undeflected 

**40** A radioactive source has a half-life of 0.5 hours. A detector near the source shows a reading of 6000 counts per second. Background radiation can be ignored. What is the reading on the detector 1.5 hours later? **A** 750 counts per second **B** 1500 counts per second **C** 2000 counts per second **D** 3000 counts per second 


© UCLES 2017 0625/22/O/N/17 

### BLANK PAGE 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeInternational Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge LocalExaminations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2017 0625/22/O/N/17 

### BLANK PAGE 


