 This syllabus is regulated for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. IB19 03_0620_12/4RP© UCLES 2019 [Turn over 

# *3869787358* 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/12 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) February/March 2019 Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet^ 45 minutes Soft clean eraserSoft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil.Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unlessthis has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

There areanswers **A** (^) , **forty B** , **C** questions on this paper. Answerand **D**. **all** questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the **one** you consider correct and record your choice in **soft pencil** on the separate Answer Sheet. **Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully.** Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer.Any rough working should be done in this booklet. A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16.Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/12/F/M/19 

**1** Four processes are listed. 1 Brownian motion 2 condensation 3 diffusion 4 evaporation Which processes involve a change of state? **A** 1 and 2 **B** 1 and 3 **C** 2 and 4 **D** 3 and 4 

**2** A student measures the time taken for 2.0sulfuric acid. g of magnesium to dissolve in 50 cm^3 of dilute 

 Which apparatus is essential to complete the experiment? 1 stop-clock 2 measuring cylinder 3 thermometer 4 balance A 1, 2 and 4 B 1 and 2 only C 1 and 4 only D 2, 3 and 4 

**3** Which method should be used to separate a mixture of two liquids? **A** crystallisation **B** electrolysis **C** filtration **D** fractional distillation 


© UCLES 2019 0620/12/F/M/19 **[Turn over** 

# 4 Lead(II) iodide is insoluble in water. 

# Lead(II) iodide is made by adding aqueous lead(II) nitrate to aqueous potassium iodide. 

# Which pieces of apparatus are needed to obtain solid lead(II) iodide from 20 cm^3 of aqueous 

# lead(II) nitrate? 

## 1 2 3 4 5 

 A 1, 2 and 4 B 1, 3 and 5 C 1, 4 and 5 D 2, 4 and 5 

**5** Which row describes isotopes of the same element? 

 number of protons number of neutrons A different different B different same C same different D same same 

**6** Which row describes the structure of the positive ion in sodium chloride? 

 protons electrons neutrons A 11 11 12 B 11 10 12 C 17 17 18 D 17 18 18 


© UCLES 2019 0620/12/F/M/19 

**7** Which pair of statements about diamond and graphite is correct? 

 diamond graphite A Diamond and graphite are both pure carbon. They are both macromolecules. B Diamond and graphite can both be used as electrodes. Graphite is also used as a lubricant. C Diamond has covalent bonds. Graphite has ionic bonds. D Diamond is hard with a high melting point. Graphite is soft with a low melting point. 

**8** What is the nucleon number of an atom? **A** the number of neutrons **B** the number of protons **C** the total number of protons and neutrons **D** the total number of protons and electrons 

**9** The relative formula mass, _M_ r , of calcium carbonate, CaCO 3 , is 100. What is the mass of carbon present in 100 g of calcium carbonate? **A** 12 g **B** 36 g **C** 40 g **D** 60 g 


© UCLES 2019 0620/12/F/M/19 **[Turn over** 

**10** Two electrolysis experiments were carried out as shown. The graphite electrodes are labelled 1– 4. power supply 

 molten sodium chloride 

## 1 2 3 4 

 concentrated aqueous sodium chloride 

## + –^ + – 

 power supply 

 Which row describes the products at the electrodes in these experiments? electrode 1 electrode 2 electrode 3 electrode 4 A chlorine hydrogen chlorine hydrogen B chlorine sodium chlorine hydrogen C chlorine sodium hydrogen chlorine D sodium chlorine sodium chlorine 

**11** 10 g of ammonium nitrate is added to water at 25 °C and the mixture stirred. The ammonium nitrate dissolves and, after one minute, the temperature of the solution is 10 °C. Which word describes this change? **A** endothermic **B** exothermic **C** neutralisation **D** reduction 

**12** Which process involves a chemical change? 

# A dissolving copper(II) sulfate 

 B distilling ethanol C freezing water 

# D neutralising copper(II) oxide 


© UCLES 2019 0620/12/F/M/19 

**13** Lumps of limestone react with dilute hydrochloric acid according to the equation shown. 

CaCO 3 + 2HC _l_ → CaC _l_ (^) 2 + H 2 O + CO 2 Which change in conditions decreases the rate of the reaction? **A** increase the concentration of the acid **B** increase the volume of the acid **C** increase the size of the lumps of limestone **D** increase the temperature **14** Which reaction is reversible? **A** Cu + ZnSO 4 → CuSO 4 + Zn **B** CuO + H 2 SO 4 → CuSO 4 + H 2 O **C** CuO + H 2 → Cu + H 2 O **D** CuSO 4 •5H 2 O → CuSO 4 + 5H 2 O **15** The reaction between magnesium and carbon dioxide is shown in the equation. 2Mg + CO 2 → 2MgO + C Which statement describes what happens in this reaction? **A** Carbon is oxidised. **B** Magnesium is reduced. **C** Neither oxidation nor reduction happens. **D** The carbon in carbon dioxide is reduced. **16** Barium hydroxide is an alkali. It reacts with hydrochloric acid. How does the pH of the hydrochloric acid change as an excess of aqueous barium hydroxide isadded? **A** The pH decreases from pH 14 and becomes constant at pH 7. **B** The pH decreases from pH 14 to about pH 1. **C** The pH increases from pH 1 and becomes constant at pH 7. **D** The pH increases from pH 1 to about pH 14. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/12/F/M/19 **[Turn over** 

# 17 Copper(II) sulfate crystals are blue. They are made by adding an excess of copper(II) oxide to 

 sulfuric acid. The mixture is heated and stirred. It is then filtered and the filtrate is allowed to evaporate, leaving blue crystals. Why is filtration necessary? A to remove soluble properties B to remove sulfuric acid C to remove the blue crystals 

# D to remove unreacted copper(II) oxide 

**18** The results of two tests on an aqueous solution of X are shown. 

 test observation aqueous sodium hydroxide added green precipitate formed acidified aqueous silver nitrate added yellow precipitate formed What is X? 

# A copper(II) chloride 

# B copper(II) iodide 

# C iron(II) chloride 

# D iron(II) iodide 

**19** Information about the solubility in water of four oxides is shown. Which oxide, when added to water, gives a solution with a pH less than pH 7? name of oxide solubility in water **A** nitrogen dioxide soluble 

# B copper(II) oxide insoluble 

# C silicon(IV) oxide insoluble 

 D barium oxide soluble 


© UCLES 2019 0620/12/F/M/19 

**20** The elements sodium to argon form Period 3 of the Periodic Table. Which row describes the trend across Period 3 from left to right? number of outer shell electrons 

 metallic character group number A decreases decreases decreases B decreases increases decreases C increases decreases increases D increases increases increases 

**21** Astatine is below iodine in Group VII in the Periodic Table. Which row describes the properties of astatine? state at room temperature reactivity **A** gas displaces chlorine, bromine and iodine **B** gas displaces iodine but does not displace chlorine or bromine **C** solid displaces iodine but does not displace chlorine or bromine **D** solid does not displace chlorine, bromine or iodine 

**22** Which row describes a transition element? 

 density in g / cm^3 

 colour of chloride A 0.98 green B 0.98 white C 8.90 green D 8.90 white 

**23** Which statement explains why elements in Group VIII of the Periodic Table are unreactive? **A** They are monatomic gases. **B** They form stable diatomic molecules. **C** They have a full outer shell of electrons. **D** They share electrons with each other. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/12/F/M/19 **[Turn over** 

**24** The electrical conductivity of magnesium was tested. Magnesium was then added to dilute sulfuric acid and a gas, Q, was produced. Which row is correct? electrical conductivity of magnesium gas Q **A** good hydrogen **B** good oxygen **C** poor hydrogen **D** poor oxygen 

**25** Four reactions that take place in the blast furnace to produce iron are shown. Which reaction is used to keep the furnace hot? **A** C + O 2 → CO 2 **B** CO 2 + C → 2CO **C** Fe 2 O 3 + 3C → 2Fe + 3CO **D** Fe 2 O 3 + 3CO → 2Fe + 3CO 2 

**26** The list gives the order of some metals and hydrogen in the reactivity series. Metal X is also included. most reactive K Mg Zn H X least reactive Cu Which row correctly shows the properties of metal X? reacts with dilute acids 

 oxide reduced by carbon A no no B no yes C yes no D yes yes 


© UCLES 2019 0620/12/F/M/19 

**27** The properties of four elements are shown. Which element is used to make aircraft bodies? 

density (^) malleablebrittle or **A** high brittle **B** high malleable **C** low brittle **D** low malleable **28** The diagram shows how water is treated to make it suitable for drinking. reservoir of water stage 1 stage 2 chlorination stage 3 drinking water stage 4 What happens in stage 2? **A** condensation **B** sublimation **C** evaporation **D** filtration **29** A farmer treats a field with calcium hydroxide to make it less acidic. Whencalcium hydroxide, they react. the farmer adds ammonium nitrate fertiliser to the field immediately after the Why does this reaction make the fertiliser less effective? **A** It makes ammonia gas, so less nitrogen is absorbed by the soil. **B** It makes an acid, making the soil acidic again. **C** It makes nitrogen gas, so less nitrogen is absorbed by the soil. **D** It makes the fertiliser too strong, stopping the plants growing so well. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/12/F/M/19 **[Turn over** 

**30** Which row showing an air pollutant and its major source is **not** correct? 

 pollutant major source of pollutant A carbon monoxide complete combustion of carbon fuels B lead compounds leaded petrol C oxides of nitrogen car engines D sulfur dioxide fossil fuels containing sulfur 

**31** Which substances are needed for iron to rust? **A** carbon dioxide and oxygen **B** oxygen only **C** water and carbon dioxide **D** water and oxygen 

**32** Methane and carbon dioxide are both greenhouse gases. Which row identifies a source of methane and a source of carbon dioxide? source of methane source of carbon dioxide **A** decomposition of vegetation hydrogen car exhausts **B** digestion in animals diesel car exhausts **C** petrol car exhausts decomposition of vegetation **D** respiration petrol car exhausts 

**33** Which element has an oxide that is used as a food preservative? **A** helium **B** hydrogen **C** iron **D** sulfur 


© UCLES 2019 0620/12/F/M/19 

**34** Lime is made by heating limestone. Which equation represents this reaction? **A** CaCO 3 → Ca + O 2 + CO 

**B** CaCO 3 → CaO + CO (^2) **C** CaCO 3 + H 2 O → CaO + H 2 CO 3 **D** CaCO 3 + H 2 O → Ca(OH) 2 + CO (^2) **35** Most objects made from synthetic polymers last for many years. Why do these polymers last for so long? chemically unreactive biodegradable **A** no no **B** no yes **C** yes no **D** yes yes **36** The structure of a compound, G, is shown. G is in the same homologous series as ethanoic acid. H C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## O 

## O H 

 Which row describes some of the properties of an aqueous solution of G? produces a gas with magnesium 

 turns methyl orange yellow A no yes B no no C yes no D yes yes 


© UCLES 2019 0620/12/F/M/19 **[Turn over** 

**37** The fractional distillation of petroleum is shown. 

 paraffin fraction 

 gasoline fraction 

 refinery gas 

 diesel oil 

 petroleum lubricating fraction 

 bitumen Which fraction is the least volatile? A bitumen B diesel oil C gasoline fraction D refinery gas 

**38** Which row shows the properties of methane? 

 soluble in water 

 state at room temperature 

 gives a positive test with aqueous bromine A no gas no B no gas yes C yes liquid no D yes liquid yes 


© UCLES 2019 0620/12/F/M/19 

**39** The formulae of five compounds are listed. 1 C 4 H 10 2 C 2 H 5 OH 3 C 4 H 9 OH 4 C 4 H 9 COOH 5 C 5 H 11 OH Which compounds are in the same homologous series? **A** 1, 3 and 4 only **B** 2, 3 and 5 only **C** 3 and 4 only **D** 3 and 5 only 

**40** Which process is used to make an alkene from a long-chain alkane? **A** combustion **B** condensation **C** cracking **D** polymerisation 


## BLANK PAGE 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeAssessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University ofCambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2019 0620/12/F/M/19 


© UCLES 2019 0620/12/F/M/19 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements^1 Hhydrogen^1 

(^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Beberyllium 9 **Key** atomic numberatomic symbol name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mgmagnesium 24 19 Kpotassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Srstrontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Gegermanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 (^22) Tititanium (^4840) Zrzirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rfrutherfordium– 23 Vvanadium (^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Crchromium (^5242) Momolybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sgseaborgium– (^25) Mnmanganese (^5543) Tctechnetium– (^75) Rerhenium (^186107) Bhbohrium– (^26) Feiron (^5644) Ruruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Iriridium (^192109) Mtmeitnerium– (^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pdpalladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Dsdarmstadtium– (^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rgroentgenium– (^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cdcadmium (^11280) Hgmercury (^201112) Cncopernicium– 114 F _l_ flerovium– (^116) Lvlivermorium– (^7) Nnitrogen 1415 Pphosphorus (^3133) Asarsenic (^7551) Sbantimony 12283 Bibismuth 209 (^8) Ooxygen 1616 Ssulfur (^3234) Seselenium (^7952) Tetellurium (^12884) Popolonium– (^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Brbromine 8053 I iodine 12785 Atastatine– (^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Scscandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) Lalanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). actinium– (^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium^141 (^91) Paprotactinium 231 (^60) Ndneodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pmpromethium– (^93) Npneptunium– (^62) Smsamarium (^15094) Puplutonium– (^63) Eueuropium (^15295) Amamericium– (^64) Gdgadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bkberkelium– (^66) Dydysprosium 16398 Cfcalifornium– (^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Eseinsteinium– (^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Mdmendelevium– (^70) Ybytterbium (^173102) Nonobelium– (^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lrlawrencium– 


