 This syllabus is regulated for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. IB19 03_0620_22/4RP© UCLES 2019 [Turn over 

# *8959971806* 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/22 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) February/March 2019 Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet^ 45 minutes Soft clean eraserSoft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil.Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unlessthis has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

There areanswers **A** (^) , **forty B** , **C** questions on this paper. Answerand **D**. **all** questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the **one** you consider correct and record your choice in **soft pencil** on the separate Answer Sheet. **Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully.** Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer.Any rough working should be done in this booklet. A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16.Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/22/F/M/19 

**1** Pure water boils at 100 °C. What happens to the water particles when water boils? **A** They gain energy and move further apart. **B** They gain energy and stay close together. **C** They lose energy and move further apart. **D** They lose energy and stay close together. 

**2** Which method should be used to separate a mixture of two liquids? **A** crystallisation **B** electrolysis **C** filtration **D** fractional distillation 

# 3 Lead(II) iodide is insoluble in water. 

# Lead(II) iodide is made by adding aqueous lead(II) nitrate to aqueous potassium iodide. 

# Which pieces of apparatus are needed to obtain solid lead(II) iodide from 20 cm^3 of aqueous 

# lead(II) nitrate? 

## 1 2 3 4 5 

 A 1, 2 and 4 B 1, 3 and 5 C 1, 4 and 5 D 2, 4 and 5 


© UCLES 2019 0620/22/F/M/19 **[Turn over** 

**4** The chromatogram of substance S is shown. Some distances, W, X, Y and Z, are labelled on the diagram. 

 solvent level 

 baseline 

 substance S 

 solvent front 

## W X Y Z 

 How is the R f value of substance S calculated? 

**A** (^) YX^ **B** WZ^ **C** (^) XY^ **D** (^) WY **5** Which row describes isotopes of the same element? number of protons number of neutrons **A** different different **B** different same **C** same different **D** same same **6** Which row describes the structure of the positive ion in sodium chloride? protons electrons neutrons **A** 11 11 12 **B** 11 10 12 **C** 17 17 18 **D** 17 18 18 


© UCLES 2019 0620/22/F/M/19 

# 7 Which statement about copper, diamond and silicon(IV) oxide is correct? 

# A Copper and silicon(IV) oxide have similar electrical conductivity. 

 B In diamond the carbon atoms are covalently bonded as flat sheets. 

# C In silicon(IV) oxide the silicon and oxygen atoms are covalently bonded as flat sheets. 

 D The structure of copper includes a lattice of positive ions. 

**8** An oxide of nitrogen has the following composition by mass: N, 30.4%; O, 69.6%. It has a relative molecular mass of 92. What is the molecular formula of the oxide of nitrogen? **A** NO **B** NO 2 **C** NO 4 **D** N 2 O 4 

**9** Calcium carbonate reacts with dilute hydrochloric acid according to the equation shown. 

CaCO 3 + 2HC _l_ → CaC _l_ (^) 2 + CO 2 + H 2 O 10 g of calcium carbonate is reacted with 100 cm^3 of 1 mol / dm^3 hydrochloric acid. The following statements are made. 1 1.2 dm^3 of carbon dioxide is formed. 2 5.6 g of calcium chloride is formed. 3 4.8 g of carbon dioxide is formed. 4 No calcium carbonate is left when the reaction is completed. Which statements about the reaction are correct? **A** 1 and 2 **B** 1 and 4 **C** 2 and 3 **D** 3 and 4 **10** Whichsodium chloride? substance is **not** produced during the electrolysis of concentrated aqueous **A** chlorine **B** hydrogen **C** sodium **D** sodium hydroxide 


© UCLES 2019 0620/22/F/M/19 **[Turn over** 

# 11 Aqueous copper(II) sulfate is electrolysed using copper electrodes. 

 What are the ionic half-equations for the reactions that occur at each electrode? anode cathode A Cu → Cu 2+^ + 2e –^ Cu 2+^ + 2e –^ → Cu B Cu 2+^ + 2e –^ → Cu Cu → Cu 2+^ + 2e – C 4OH–^ → 2H 2 O + O 2 + 4e –^ Cu 2+^ + 2e –^ → Cu D 4OH–^ → 2H 2 O + O 2 + 4e –^ 2H+^ + 2e –^ → H 2 

**12** 10 g of ammonium nitrate is added to water at 25 °C and the mixture stirred. The ammonium nitrate dissolves and, after one minute, the temperature of the solution is 10 °C. Which word describes this change? **A** endothermic **B** exothermic **C** neutralisation **D** reduction 

**13** Hydrogen reacts with chlorine according to the following equation. 

H 2 (g) + C _l_ (^) 2 (g) → 2HC _l_ (g) The reaction is exothermic. Which statement about this reaction is correct? **A** Energy absorbed for bond breaking is greater than the energy released in bond making. **B** Energy absorbed for bond breaking is less than the energy released in bond making. **C** Energy released in bond breaking is greater than the energy absorbed in bond making. **D** Energy released in bond breaking is less than the energy absorbed in bond making. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/22/F/M/19 

**14** Hydrogen-oxygen fuel cells can be used to power cars. Platinum is used as a catalyst. The amount of energy produced per gram is shown for three fuels. fuel energy producedper g of fuel / kJ hydrogen 143 methane 55 petrol 44 Which statement is correct and is an advantage of a hydrogen-oxygen fuel cell? **A** Hydrogen is difficult to store. **B** Hydrogen produces less energy per gram than methane or petrol. **C** Platinum is rare and expensive. **D** The only product is water. 

**15** A student adds dilute hydrochloric acid at two different temperatures to two different lumps oflimestone. The lumps of limestone have the same mass. 

 The carbon dioxide gas produced is collected in a gas syringe. The volume of carbon dioxide collected in 1 minute at each temperature is shown. 

temperature / °C (^) produced in 1 minutevolume of carbon dioxide / cm 3 25 10 50 40 Which row describes and explains the results obtained at 50 °C compared with 25 °C? reaction rate energy of collisions **A** higher lower **B** higher higher **C** lower lower **D** lower higher 


© UCLES 2019 0620/22/F/M/19 **[Turn over** 

**16** Which reaction is reversible? **A** Cu + ZnSO 4 → CuSO 4 + Zn **B** CuO + H 2 SO 4 → CuSO 4 + H 2 O **C** CuO + H 2 → Cu + H 2 O **D** CuSO 4 •5H 2 O → CuSO 4 + 5H 2 O 

**17** Some nitrogen dioxide gas was put in a gas syringe. The end of the gas syringe is sealed. A reversible reaction occurs. The reaction reaches equilibrium. 2NO 2 (g) N 2 O 4 (g) dark brown light yellow The forward reaction is exothermic. Which statement about the reaction is correct? **A** If the gas syringe is placed in a cold water bath, the colour becomes darker. **B** If the gas syringe is placed in a hot water bath, the colour becomes lighter. **C** If the volume in the gas syringe is increased, the colour becomes lighter. **D** If the volume in the gas syringe is decreased, the colour becomes lighter. 

**18** The reaction between magnesium and carbon dioxide is shown in the equation. 2Mg + CO 2 → 2MgO + C Which statement describes what happens in this reaction? **A** Carbon is oxidised. **B** Magnesium is reduced. **C** Neither oxidation nor reduction happens. **D** The carbon in carbon dioxide is reduced. 

**19** Which changes involve reduction? 1 2 I–^ → I 2 + 2e – 2 CuO + H 2 → Cu + H 2 O 3 A _l_ 3+^ + 3e –^ → A _l_ 

4 Pb 2+^ + SO 4 2–^ → PbSO (^4) **A** 1 and 2 **B** 1 and 4 **C** 2 and 3 **D** 3 and 4 


© UCLES 2019 0620/22/F/M/19 

**20** Barium hydroxide is an alkali. It reacts with hydrochloric acid. How does the pH of the hydrochloric acid change as an excess of aqueous barium hydroxide is added? **A** The pH decreases from pH 14 and becomes constant at pH 7. **B** The pH decreases from pH 14 to about pH 1. **C** The pH increases from pH 1 and becomes constant at pH 7. **D** The pH increases from pH 1 to about pH 14. 

**21** Which statement describes a chemical property of aluminium oxide, A _l_ (^) 2 O 3? **A** It reacts with acids but not with bases. **B** It reacts with acids and bases. **C** It reacts with bases but not with acids. **D** It reacts with water. **22** The results of two tests on an aqueous solution of X are shown. test observation aqueous sodium hydroxide added green precipitate formed acidified aqueous silver nitrate added yellow precipitate formed What is X? 

# A copper(II) chloride 

# B copper(II) iodide 

# C iron(II) chloride 

# D iron(II) iodide 


© UCLES 2019 0620/22/F/M/19 **[Turn over** 

**23** Four stages used to prepare an insoluble salt are listed. 1 drying 2 filtration 3 precipitation 4 washing In which order are the stages done? **A** 2 → 1 → 3 → 4 **B** 3 → 2 → 4 → 1 **C** 3 → 4 → 1 → 2 **D** 4 → 3 → 2 → 1 

**24** The elements sodium to argon form Period 3 of the Periodic Table. Which row describes the trend across Period 3 from left to right? number of outer shell electrons 

 metallic character group number A decreases decreases decreases B decreases increases decreases C increases decreases increases D increases increases increases 

**25** Astatine is below iodine in Group VII in the Periodic Table. Which row describes the properties of astatine? state at roomtemperature reactivity **A** gas displaces chlorine, bromine and iodine **B** gas displaces iodine but does not displace chlorine or bromine **C** solid displaces iodine but does not displace chlorine or bromine **D** solid does not displace chlorine, bromine or iodine 


© UCLES 2019 0620/22/F/M/19 

**26** Which statement explains why elements in Group VIII of the Periodic Table are unreactive? **A** They are monatomic gases. **B** They form stable diatomic molecules. **C** They have a full outer shell of electrons. **D** They share electrons with each other. 

**27** In which reaction does Fe(s) form ions when the mixture is heated? **A** Fe(s) + CaO(s) **B** Fe(s) + MgO(s) **C** Fe(s) + ZnO(s) **D** Fe(s) + CuO(s) 

**28** The list gives the order of some metals and hydrogen in the reactivity series. Metal X is also included. most reactive K Mg Zn H X least reactive Cu Which row correctly shows the properties of metal X? 

 dilute acidsreacts with oxide reducedby carbon A no no B no yes C yes no D yes yes 


© UCLES 2019 0620/22/F/M/19 **[Turn over** 

**29** Which metal carbonate does **not** produce carbon dioxide when it is heated? 

# A copper(II) carbonate 

# B iron(II) carbonate 

 C potassium carbonate D zinc carbonate 

**30** Which statement about the extraction of metals is correct? **A** Aluminium is extracted by the electrolysis of hematite. **B** Cryolite acts as a reducing agent in the extraction of aluminium. **C** Zinc is extracted by the electrolysis of zinc blende. **D** Zinc is obtained by heating zinc oxide with coke. 

**31** The diagram shows how water is treated to make it suitable for drinking. 

 reservoir of water 

 stage 1 stage 2 chlorination 

 stage 3 drinking water 

 stage 4 

 What happens in stage 2? A condensation B sublimation C evaporation D filtration 

**32** What are the main substances produced by the fractional distillation of liquid air? **A** oxygen and carbon dioxide **B** oxygen and nitrogen **C** helium and nitrogen **D** hydrogen and oxygen 


© UCLES 2019 0620/22/F/M/19 

**33** The raw materials for the Haber process are hydrogen and nitrogen. What are the sources of the hydrogen and nitrogen? **A** hydrogen from ethanol and nitrogen from NPK fertilisers **B** hydrogen from methane and nitrogen from air **C** hydrogen from sulfuric acid and nitrogen from air **D** hydrogen from water and nitrogen from ammonium nitrate 

**34** Which process removes carbon dioxide from the Earth’s atmosphere? **A** combustion **B** heating limestone **C** photosynthesis **D** respiration 

**35** The Contact process is used to make sulfuric acid. The steps in the process are listed. 1 Dissolve sulfur trioxide in 98% concentrated sulfuric acid. 2 Heat sulfur strongly in air. 3 Add oleum to water. 

# 4 Pass sulfur dioxide over a vanadium(V) oxide catalyst. 

 Which sequence of steps is correct? A 4 → 1 → 2 → 3 B 4 → 2 → 3 → 1 C 2 → 1 → 4 → 3 D 2 → 4 → 1 → 3 


© UCLES 2019 0620/22/F/M/19 **[Turn over** 

**36** The fractional distillation of petroleum is shown. 

 paraffin fraction 

 gasoline fraction 

 refinery gas 

 diesel oil 

 petroleum lubricating fraction 

 bitumen Which fraction is the least volatile? A bitumen B diesel oil C gasoline fraction D refinery gas 

**37** Which statement about members of a homologous series is correct? **A** Successive members differ by CH 3. **B** Successive members have a molecular mass that differs by 14. **C** They have the same molecular formula. **D** They have identical physical properties. 

**38** Ethanol is manufactured on a large scale by fermentation. Which statement about fermentation is correct? **A** It is a continuous process. **B** A renewable raw material is used. **C** It is a very fast reaction. **D** The ethanol produced is pure. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/22/F/M/19 

**39** The structure of a compound, G, is shown. G is in the same homologous series as ethanoic acid. 

 H C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## O 

## O H 

 Which row describes some of the properties of an aqueous solution of G? produces a gas with magnesium 

 turns methyl orange yellow A no yes B no no C yes no D yes yes 

**40** Which statement about polymers is correct? 

 A Nylon contains the linkage. B Nylon is a polyester. C Propane can be polymerised by addition polymerisation. D The linkage in Terylene contains a carbon-carbon double bond. 

## C 

## O 

## N 

## H 


## BLANK PAGE 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeAssessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University ofCambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2019 0620/22/F/M/19 


© UCLES 2019 0620/22/F/M/19 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements^1 Hhydrogen^1 

(^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Beberyllium 9 **Key** atomic numberatomic symbol name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mgmagnesium 24 19 Kpotassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Srstrontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Gegermanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 (^22) Tititanium (^4840) Zrzirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rfrutherfordium– 23 Vvanadium (^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Crchromium (^5242) Momolybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sgseaborgium– (^25) Mnmanganese (^5543) Tctechnetium– (^75) Rerhenium (^186107) Bhbohrium– (^26) Feiron (^5644) Ruruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Iriridium (^192109) Mtmeitnerium– (^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pdpalladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Dsdarmstadtium– (^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rgroentgenium– (^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cdcadmium (^11280) Hgmercury (^201112) Cncopernicium– 114 F _l_ flerovium– (^116) Lvlivermorium– (^7) Nnitrogen 1415 Pphosphorus (^3133) Asarsenic (^7551) Sbantimony 12283 Bibismuth 209 (^8) Ooxygen 1616 Ssulfur (^3234) Seselenium (^7952) Tetellurium (^12884) Popolonium– (^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Brbromine 8053 I iodine 12785 Atastatine– (^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Scscandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) Lalanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). actinium– (^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium^141 (^91) Paprotactinium 231 (^60) Ndneodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pmpromethium– (^93) Npneptunium– (^62) Smsamarium (^15094) Puplutonium– (^63) Eueuropium (^15295) Amamericium– (^64) Gdgadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bkberkelium– (^66) Dydysprosium 16398 Cfcalifornium– (^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Eseinsteinium– (^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Mdmendelevium– (^70) Ybytterbium (^173102) Nonobelium– (^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lrlawrencium– 


