 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 16 printed pages. IB17 03_0620_22/5RP© UCLES 2017 [Turn over 

# *2721741017* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/22 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) February/March 2017 Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet^ 45 minutes Soft clean eraserSoft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid.Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you.DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

There areanswers A (^) ,forty B, C questions on this paper. Answerand D. all questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet.A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2017 0620/22/F/M/17 

1 A gas is released at point Q in the apparatus shown. 

 damp Universal Indicator paper 

 point Q 

 Which gas changes the colour of the damp Universal Indicator paper most quickly? 

gas (^) molecular massrelative A ammonia 17 B carbon dioxide 44 C chlorine 71 D hydrogen 2 2 The diagrams show liquids in a burette and a measuring cylinder. 50 40 30 

## 27 

## 28 

 burette measuring cylinder Which row shows the correct readings for the burette and the measuring cylinder? burette measuringcylinder A 27.8 42 B 27.8 44 C 28.2 42 D 28.2 44 


© UCLES 2017 0620/22/F/M/17 [Turn over 

3 The diagram shows how muddy water can be purified. muddy water 

 clean water 

 fine sand gravel small pebbles 

 Which process for purifying the muddy water is shown? A crystallisation B distillation C filtration D solvent extraction 

4 Which statement explains why isotopes of an element have the same chemical properties? A They have different numbers of neutrons. B They have the same number of electrons as protons. C They have the same number of electrons in the outer shell. D They have the same number of protons in the nucleus. 


© UCLES 2017 0620/22/F/M/17 

5 The formulae of some ions are shown. 

 positive ions negative ions Al 3+^ Br – Ca2+^ CO 3 2– Cu2+^ NO 3 – Fe3+^ S2– K+^ SO 4 2– In which row is the formula not correct? compound formula A aluminium sulfate Al 2 (SO 4 ) 3 B calcium nitrate Ca(NO 3 ) 2 

# C iron(III) bromide Fe 3 Br 

 D potassium sulfide K 2 S 

# 6 Diamond and silicon(IV) oxide both have giant structures. 

 Which statements are correct? 1 Both substances are compounds. 2 There are strong covalent bonds in diamond. 

# 3 Silicon(IV) oxide is bonded ionically. 

 4 Both substances have very high melting points. A 1 and 2 B 2 and 3 C 2 and 4 D 3 and 4 

7 Which statement about metals is correct? A Layers of positive ions can slide over each other making metals malleable. B Metallic bonding consists of a lattice of negative ions in a sea of delocalised electrons. C Metallic bonding consists of a lattice of positive ions in a sea of delocalised negative ions. D Metals conduct electricity because positive ions are free to move. 


© UCLES 2017 0620/22/F/M/17 [Turn over 

8 The gas hydrazine has the molecular formula N 2 H 4. Hydrazine burns in air to form nitrogen gas and steam. N 2 H 4 (g) + O 2 (g) → N 2 (g) + 2H 2 O(g) Which statements are correct? 1 1 mole of hydrazine gives 72room temperature and pressure. dm^3 of gaseous products when it reacts with oxygen at 2 The empirical formula of hydrazine is NH 2. 3 The total number of atoms in 1 mole of hydrazine is 6 × the Avogadro constant. 4 The volume of 1 mole of hydrazine at room temperature and pressure is 6 × 24 dm^3. A 1, 2 and 3 B 1 and 2 only C 2, 3 and 4 D 3 and 4 only 

# 9 Copper(II) carbonate is broken down by heating to form copper(II) oxide and carbon dioxide gas. 

 The equation for the reaction is shown. CuCO 3 → CuO + CO 2 

# 31.0 g of copper(II) carbonate are heated until all of the contents of the test-tube have turned 

 from green to black. 

# The yield of copper(II) oxide formed is 17.5 g. 

 What is the percentage yield? A 19.02% B 21.88% C 56.50% D 87.50% 

# 10 The diagram shows the electrolysis of aqueous copper(II) sulfate. 

## – + 

# electrodescarbon aqueous copper(II) sulfate 

 Which statement is correct? A Copper metal is deposited at the positive electrode. B In the external circuit the electrons move from positive to negative. C In the solution the electrons move from negative to positive. D Oxygen gas is produced at the positive electrode. 


© UCLES 2017 0620/22/F/M/17 

11 Four solutions are separately electrolysed. 

 experiment solution electrodes 1 dilute aqueous sodium chloride carbon 

# 2 aqueous copper(II) sulfate copper 

 3 concentrated hydrochloric acid carbon 4 dilute sulfuric acid carbon In which two experiments is a colourless gas evolved at the anode? A 1 and 2 B 1 and 4 C 2 and 3 D 3 and 4 

12 Ammonia is made by reacting nitrogen with hydrogen in the presence of an iron catalyst. The reaction is exothermic. The equation for the reaction is shown. N 2 + 3H 2 → 2NH 3 The bond energies are shown in the table. bond bond energy in kJ / mol H–H 436 N–H 390 N≡N 945 What is the energy given out during this reaction? A –4593 kJ / mol B –1083 kJ / mol C –959 kJ / mol D –87 kJ / mol 


© UCLES 2017 0620/22/F/M/17 [Turn over 

13 The energy level diagram for the reaction between P and Q to form R and S is shown. 

 energy 

## P + Q 

## R + S 

 Which row describes the energy changes involved and the type of reaction? energy changes involved type of reaction A more energy is given out when the bonds in the products are formed than is needed to break the bonds in the reactants endothermic 

B (^) are formed than is needed to break the bonds in the reactantsmore energy is given out when the bonds in the products exothermic C more energy is needed to break the bonds in the reactants than is given out when the bonds in the products are formed endothermic D (^) than is given out when the bonds in the products are formedmore energy is needed to break the bonds in the reactants exothermic 

# 14 Copper(II) carbonate reacts with dilute sulfuric acid. 

 CuCO 3 (s) + H 2 SO 4 (aq) → CuSO 4 (aq) + CO 2 (g) + H 2 O(l) The rate of the reaction can be changed by varying the conditions. Which changes always increase the rate of this chemical reaction? 1 increasing the concentration of sulfuric acid 

# 2 increasing the size of the pieces of copper(II) carbonate 

 3 increasing the temperature 4 increasing the volume of sulfuric acid A 1, 3 and 4 B 1 and 3 only C 2 and 3 D 3 and 4 only 

15 Which reaction is not affected by the presence of light? A a candle burning B methane reacting with chlorine C photosynthesis D silver bromide decomposing to form silver 


© UCLES 2017 0620/22/F/M/17 

16 The equation for the reversible reaction between hydrogen and iodine to form hydrogen iodide isshown. 

 The colours of the reactants and products are shown. H 2 (g) + I 2 (g) 2HI(g) colourless purple colourless The forward reaction is exothermic. Which statement is correct? A An increase in pressure has no effect on the equilibrium position. B The purple colour fades when the reaction mixture is heated. C When equilibrium is reached, both forward and reverse reactions stop. D When more hydrogen gas is added, the purple colour increases. 

17 Chlorine displaces bromine from a solution of potassium bromide. Cl 2 + 2KBr → 2KCl + Br 2 What is the oxidising agent in this reaction? A bromide ions B bromine C chloride ions D chlorine 

18 Beryllium oxide reacts with both sulfuric acid and aqueous sodium hydroxide. Which type of oxide is beryllium oxide? A acidic B amphoteric C basic D neutral 


© UCLES 2017 0620/22/F/M/17 [Turn over 

19 A student investigates two acids W and X. The same volumes of W and X are reacted separately with excess magnesium. The student makes the following observations. 1 Hydrogen gas is produced at a faster rate with W than with X. 2 The total volume of hydrogen gas produced is the same for both acids. Which statement explains these observations? A The pH of W is higher than the pH of X. B W is an organic acid. C W is a stronger acid than X. D W is more concentrated than X. 

20 A student is given an unknown solution. 

# Which two tests provide evidence that the solution is copper(II) sulfate? 

 1 adding dilute hydrochloric acid 2 adding aqueous sodium hydroxide 3 adding dilute nitric acid, then silver nitrate solution 4 adding dilute nitric acid, then barium nitrate solution A 1 and 3 B 1 and 4 C 2 and 3 D 2 and 4 


© UCLES 2017 0620/22/F/M/17 

21 The diagram shows the steps in the preparation of a salt. 

 step 1 step 2 step 3 step 4 Which salt is prepared by this method? A barium sulfate 

# B copper(II) sulfate 

 C potassium sulfate D sodium sulfate 

22 Which property of elements increases across a period of the Periodic Table? A metallic character B number of electron shells C number of outer shell electrons D tendency to form positive ions 

23 Magnesium, calcium, strontium and barium are Group II elements. Group II elements follow the same trends as Group I elements. Which statements about Group II elements are correct? 1 Calcium reacts faster than magnesium with water. 2 Barium reacts less vigorously than magnesium with dilute acid. 3 Strontium oxidises in air more slowly than barium. A 1, 2 and 3 B 1 and 2 only C 1 and 3 only D 2 and 3 only 


© UCLES 2017 0620/22/F/M/17 [Turn over 

24 The noble gases are in Group VIII of the Periodic Table. Which statement explains why noble gases are unreactive? A They all have eight electrons in their outer shells. B They all have full outer shells. C They are all gases. D They are all monoatomic. 

25 Part of the Periodic Table is shown. Which element is used as a catalyst? **A** 

## C 

## D 

## B 

26 Which statement about all metals is correct? A They are attracted to a magnet. B They are weak and brittle. C They may be used to form alloys. D They react with water. 

27 Which substance produces sulfur dioxide when roasted in air? A bauxite B cryolite C hematite D zinc blende 

28 Which metal carbonate doesburner? not produce carbon dioxide when it is heated with a Bunsen 

# A copper(II) carbonate 

 B magnesium carbonate C sodium carbonate D zinc carbonate 


© UCLES 2017 0620/22/F/M/17 

29 Two experiments are carried out. In experiment 1, copper is heated with steam. 

# In experiment 2, copper(II) oxide is heated with carbon. 

 steam 

 copper experiment 1 experiment 2 

 heat 

# copper(II) oxide 

 and carbon 

 Which row describes what happens in experiments 1 and 2? experiment 1 experiment 2 A no reaction no reaction B no reaction reaction C reaction no reaction D reaction reaction 

30 Which two gases are obtained from liquid air by fractional distillation? A carbon dioxide and oxygen B carbon dioxide and water vapour C nitrogen and oxygen D nitrogen and water vapour 

31 An experiment to find the percentage of oxygen in 150 cm^3 of polluted air is shown. 

 water 

 damp iron wool measuring cylinder 150 cm^3 of polluted air 

 The apparatus is left for one week. After this time, the volume of gas in the measuring cylinder is 122 cm^3. What is the percentage of oxygen, to the nearest whole number, in the polluted air? A 19% B 21% C 28% D 81% 


© UCLES 2017 0620/22/F/M/17 [Turn over 

32 Two reactions, X and Y, produce carbon dioxide. X Y CH 4 CO 2 CaCO 3 Which types of reaction are X and Y? X Y A combustion combustion B combustion thermal decomposition C thermal decomposition combustion D thermal decomposition thermal decomposition 

33 The ions present in ammonium sulfate are formed from the products of the Contact and Haber processes. Both of these processes involve the use of a catalyst. Which row is correct? ion formed from process catalyst A ammonium ammonia Contact iron 

# B ammonium ammonia Haber vanadium(V) oxide 

# C sulfate sulfuric acid Contact vanadium(V) oxide 

 D sulfate sulfuric acid Haber iron 

34 The table shows the composition of four different types of petroleum. 

 fraction Arabian Heavy/ % Arabian Light/ % Iranian Heavy/ % North Sea/ % gasoline 18 21 21 23 kerosene 11 15 13 15 diesel oil 18 21 20 24 fuel oil 53 43 46 38 Which type of petroleum is best for the motor vehicle industry? A Arabian Heavy B Arabian Light C Iranian Heavy D North Sea 


© UCLES 2017 0620/22/F/M/17 

35 Which reaction of ethene is not an addition reaction? A reaction with bromine B reaction with hydrogen C reaction with oxygen D reaction with steam 

36 Ethanol is a fuel used in cars. It can be made from petroleum. C 4 H 10 → C 2 H 4 + C 2 H 6 cracking C 2 H 4 + H 2 O → C 2 H 5 OH producing ethanol C 2 H 5 OH + 3O 2 → 2CO 2 + 3H 2 O burning Compounds of how many homologous series appear in these equations? A 1 B 2 C 3 D 4 

37 Ethanol is produced from either ethene or sugar. Which type of chemical reaction is used in each case? ethene → ethanol sugar → ethanol A addition fermentation B addition fractional distillation C distillation fermentation D distillation fractional distillation 

38 The structural formula of an organic compound is shown. CH 3 CH 2 COOCH 3 What is the name of this compound? A butanoic acid B ethyl ethanoate C methyl propanoate D propyl methanoate 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeInternational Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge LocalExaminations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2017 0620/22/F/M/17 

39 The diagram shows the structure of an important product. 

 C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

 This product is formed by …... 1 .….. of an .….. 2 ……. Which words complete gaps 1 and 2? 1 2 A addition polymerisation alkane B addition polymerisation alkene C cracking alkane D cracking alkene 

40 Which pair of compounds reacts to form a condensation polymer? A CH 3 COOH and C 2 H 5 NH 2 B HCOOH and HOC 2 H 4 OH C HOC 6 H 12 OH and HOOCC 3 H 6 COOH D H 2 NC 2 H 4 NH 2 and HOC 3 H 6 OH 


© UCLES 2017 0620/22/F/M/17 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements^1 Hhydrogen^1 

(^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Beberyllium 9 atomic number atomic symbol **Key**^ name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mgmagnesium 24 19 Kpotassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Srstrontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Gegermanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 22 Tititanium (^4840) Zrzirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rfrutherfordium– 23 Vvanadium (^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Crchromium (^5242) Momolybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sgseaborgium– (^25) Mnmanganese (^5543) Tctechnetium– (^75) Rerhenium (^186107) Bhbohrium– (^26) Feiron (^5644) Ruruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Iriridium (^192109) Mtmeitnerium– (^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pdpalladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Dsdarmstadtium– (^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rgroentgenium– (^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cdcadmium (^11280) Hgmercury (^201112) Cncopernicium– 114 F _l_ flerovium– 116 Lvlivermorium– (^7) Nnitrogen 1415 Pphosphorus (^3133) Asarsenic (^7551) Sbantimony 12283 Bibismuth 209 (^8) Ooxygen 1616 Ssulfur (^3234) Seselenium (^7952) Tetellurium (^12884) Popolonium– (^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Brbromine 8053 I iodine 12785 Atastatine– (^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Scscandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) Lalanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). actinium– (^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium^141 (^91) Paprotactinium 231 (^60) Ndneodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pmpromethium– (^93) Npneptunium– (^62) Smsamarium (^15094) Puplutonium– (^63) Eueuropium (^15295) Amamericium– (^64) Gdgadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bkberkelium– (^66) Dydysprosium 16398 Cfcalifornium– (^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Eseinsteinium– (^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Mdmendelevium– (^70) Ybytterbium (^173102) Nonobelium– (^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lrlawrencium– 


