# Cambridge IGCSE™ 

* 1 5 5 2 2 1 6 6 2 2 * 

 DC (PQ/CB) 196734/3 R © UCLES 2020 [Turn over 

 This document has 16 pages. Blank pages are indicated. 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/22 

 Paper 2 February/March 2020 

 2 hours 

 You must answer on the question paper. 

 No additional materials are needed. 

 INSTRUCTIONS ● Answer all questions. ● Use a black or dark blue pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. ● Write your name, centre number and candidate number in the boxes at the top of the page. ● Write your answer to each question in the space provided. ● Do not use an erasable pen or correction fluid. ● Do not write on any bar codes. ● You should use a calculator where appropriate. ● You must show all necessary working clearly; no marks will be given for unsupported answers from a calculator. ● Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place for angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. 

 INFORMATION ● The total mark for this paper is 80. ● The number of marks for each question or part question is shown in brackets [ ]. 


©UCLES 2020 0606/22/F/M/20 

 Mathematical Formulae 

**1. ALGEBRA** 

 Quadratic Equation 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

_x_ (^) _a b b ac_ 2 !^24 = 

- - 

 Binomial Theorem 

 ( a b ) a … … 

 n a b 

 n a b 

 n r 

 a b b 1 2 

 +^ n^ = n^ + n^ -^1 + n^ -^2 2 + + n^ r^ r^ + + n 

 J 

 L 

 KK 

 J 

 L 

 KK 

 J 

 L 

 KK 

 N 

 P 

 OO 

 N 

 P 

 OO 

 N 

 P 

 OO 

where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( !)!! _n r n_^ _r_^ _r_ = _n_ 

- 

 J 

 L 

 KK 

 N 

 P 

 OO 

 Arithmetic series u^ a^ n d 

 S n a^ l^ n a n d 

 1 

 2 

 1 2 

 1 2 1 

 n 

 n 

 − 

 − 

 = + 

 = ^ + = + 

 ^ 

 h ^ 

 h 

 # h 

 Geometric series u ar 

_S_ (^) _r a r r S a_^ _r r_ 1 1 1 1 1 _n n n n_ 1 1 −^! − − = = 3 = − ^ ^ ^ h h h 

**2. TRIGONOMETRY** 

 Identities sin 2 A + cos^2 A = 1 sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

 Formulae for ∆ ABC 

 sin A sin sin 

 a B 

 b C 

 = = c 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

 ∆ = 21 bc sin A 


©UCLES 2020 0606/22/F/M/20 **[Turn over** 

1 Find the values of _x_ for which 12 _x_^2 20 _x_ + 5 1 ( 2 _x_ + 1 ) ( _x_ 1 ). [4] 

2 Variables _x_ and _y_ are such that, when 1g _y_ is plotted against _x_^3 ,^ a straight line graph passing through the points (6, 7) and (10, 9) is obtained. Find _y_ as a function of _x_. [4] 


©UCLES 2020 0606/22/F/M/20 

3 Find the exact solution of 3 2 _x_^^ 3 _x_ +^1 4 = 0. [4] 

4 The position vectors of three points, _A_ , _B_ and _C_ , relative to an origin _O_ , are , 

## 5 

## 7 

## 

## 

 e o 

## 10 

## 4 

e o (^) and _x y_ e o respectively. Given that _AC_ = 4 _BC_ ,find the unit vector in the direction of _OC_. [5] 


©UCLES 2020 0606/22/F/M/20 **[Turn over** 

5 (a) On the axes below, sketch the graph of _y_ = 5 _x_ 7 , showing the coordinates of the points where the graph meets the coordinate axes. [3] 

## O 

 y 

 x 

 (b) Solve 5 5 x 7 1 = 14. [3] 


©UCLES 2020 0606/22/F/M/20 

6 (a) A circle has a radius of 6 cm. A sector of this circle has a perimeter of 2 6`^ + 5 rj^ cm. Find the area of this sector. [4] 

 (b) 

## O 

 7 cm 

## A 

## B 

 rad 4 

 r 

 The diagram shows the sector AOB of a circle with centre O and radius 7 cm. Angle AOB = 4 rradians. Find the perimeter of the shaded region. [3] 


©UCLES 2020 0606/22/F/M/20 **[Turn over** 

7 Find the coordinates of the points of intersection of the curves _x_^2 = 5 _y_ 1 and _y_ = _x_^2 2 _x_ + 1. [5] 


©UCLES 2020 0606/22/F/M/20 

## 8 

## 1 

## 2 

## 0 

## 1 

## 2 

## 3 

## 4 

## 5 

## 6 

 f( x ) 

 2 r^ x 3 

 4 r 3 

 8 r 3 

 2 r 

 The diagram shows the graph of f ( ) x = a cos bx + c for 0 G x G 83 r^ radians. 

 (a) Explain why f is a function. [1] 

 (b) Write down the range of f. [1] 

 (c) Find the value of each of the constants a , b and c. [4] 


©UCLES 2020 0606/22/F/M/20 **[Turn over** 

9 Variables _x_ and _y_ are such that _y_ sin. _x_ 

 e x x 2 

 3 = Use differentiation to find the approximate change in y 

 as x increases from 0.5 to 0 5. + h ,where h is small. [6] 


©UCLES 2020 0606/22/F/M/20 

10 (a) g ( ) _x_ = 3 + (^1) _x_ for _x_ H 1. (i) Find an expression for g -^1 ( ). _x_ [2] (ii) Write down the range of g -^1. [1] (iii) Find the domain of g -^1. [2] 


©UCLES 2020 0606/22/F/M/20 **[Turn over** 

 (b) h( ) x =21n( 3 x 1 ) for x H 32. The graph of y = h( ) x intersects the line y = x at two distinct points. On the axes below, sketch the graph of y = h( ) x and hence sketch the graph of y = h -^1 ( ). x [4] 

## O 

 y 

 x 


©UCLES 2020 0606/22/F/M/20 

## 11 

 r 

 h 

 A container is a circular cylinder, open at one end, with a base radius of r cm and a height of h cm. The volume of the container is 1000 cm^3. Given that r and h can vary and that the total outer surface area of the container has a minimum value, find this value. [8] 


©UCLES 2020 0606/22/F/M/20 **[Turn over** 

12 A particle _P_ moves in a straight line such that, _t_ seconds after passing through a fixed point _O_ , its 

 acceleration, a ms -^2 , is given by a =6 .When t = 0 ,the velocity of P is 18 ms-^1. 

 (a) Find the time at which P comes to instantaneous rest. [3] 

 (b) Find the distance travelled by P in the 3rd second. [3] 


©UCLES 2020 0606/22/F/M/20 

13 (a) The sum of the first two terms of a geometric progression is 10 and the third term is 9. 

 (i) Find the possible values of the common ratio and the first term. [5] 

 (ii) Find the sum to infinity of the convergent progression. [1] 


©UCLES 2020 0606/22/F/M/20 

(b) In an arithmetic progression, _u_ (^) 1 =10 and _u_ (^) 4 = 14 .Find _u_ (^) 100 + _u_ (^) 101 + _u_ (^) 102 + f+ _u_ 200 , the sum of the 100th to the 200th terms of the progression. [4] 


©UCLES 2020 0606/22/F/M/20 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. 

## BLANK PAGE 


