 This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. 

 DC (NF/SW) 105994 © UCLES 2015 [Turn over 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

* 5 7 8 8 7 7 5 7 0 7 * 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/23 Paper 2 May/June 2015 2 hours Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all the questions. Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 


© UCLES 2015 0606/23/M/J/15 

 Mathematical Formulae 

### 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

 x 

 b b ac a 

 = 

 − 2 − 4 2 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( _n_ 

# 1 ) a 

_n_ –1 (^) _b_ + 

# ( 

 n 

# 2 ) a 

_n_ –2 (^) _b_ (^2) + … + 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) a 

_n_ – _r_ (^) _br_ (^) + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( _n_ 

# r ) =^ 

 n! ( n – r )! r! 

### 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ 

 sin 2 A + cos^2 A = 1 

 sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A 

 cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC_ 

 a sin A =^ 

 b sin B =^ 

 c sin C 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

 ∆ = 

 1 2 bc^ sin^ A 


© UCLES 2015 0606/23/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

**1 (a)** Write log 27 _x_ as a logarithm to base 3. [2] 

**(b)** Given that log (^) _a y_ = (^3) ^log (^) _a_ 15 log _a_ (^3) h + 1 , express _y_ in terms of _a_. [3] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/23/M/J/15 

**2 (a)** 

 O 2 x 

### 4 

 y 

 The diagram shows the graph of y = f ( ) x passing through ^0, 4^ h^ and touching the x -axis at ^2 0^ , h. Given that the graph of y = f ( ) x is a straight line, write down the two possible expressions for f ( ) x. [2] 

 (b) On the axes below, sketch the graph of y = ex^ + 3 , stating the coordinates of any point of intersection with the coordinate axes. [3] 

 O x 

 y 


© UCLES 2015 0606/23/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

**3 (a)** Find the matrix **A** if 4 **A** 5 

### 4 

### 3 

### 0 

### 2 

### 1 

### 5 65 

### 52 

### 31 

### 8 

### 2 

### 19 

### + 

### 

### 

 c m =c m. [2] 

 (b) P 

### 30 

### 70 

### 50 

### 40 

### 25 

### 15 

### 40 

### 20 

### 65 

### 80 

### 30 

### 75 

= (^) f p **Q** = ^ 650 500 450 225 h The matrix **P** represents the number of 4 different televisions that are on sale in each of 3 shops. The matrix **Q** represents the value of each television in dollars. **(i)** State, without evaluation, what is represented by the matrix **QP**. [1] **(ii)** Given that the matrix **R** 

### 1 

### 1 

### 1 

= (^) f p, state, without evaluation, what is represented by the matrix **QPR**. [1] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/23/M/J/15 

### 4 

 34 r rad 

 8 cm 

### O 

### Q 

### P 

### T 

 The diagram shows a circle, centre O , radius 8 cm. The points P and Q lie on the circle. The lines PT and QT 

are tangents to the circle and angle _POQ_ (^) 4 3 _r_ = radians. **(i)** Find the length of _PT_. [2] **(ii)** Find the area of the shaded region. [3] **(iii)** Find the perimeter of the shaded region. [2] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/23/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

**5 (a)** A lock can be opened using only the number 4351. State whether this is a permutation or a combination of digits, giving a reason for your answer. [1] 

 (b) There are twenty numbered balls in a bag. Two of the balls are numbered 0, six are numbered 1, five are numbered 2 and seven are numbered 3, as shown in the table below. 

 Number on ball 0 1 2 3 

 Frequency 2 6 5 7 

 Four of these balls are chosen at random, without replacement. Calculate the number of ways this can be done so that 

 (i) the four balls all have the same number, [2] 

 (ii) the four balls all have different numbers, [2] 

 (iii) the four balls have numbers that total 3. [3] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/23/M/J/15 

**6** A particle _P_ is projected from the origin _O_ so that it moves in a straight line. At time _t_ seconds after projection, the velocity of the particle, _v_ ms–1, is given by _v_ = 2 _t_^2 14 _t_ + 12. 

 (i) Find the time at which P first comes to instantaneous rest. [2] 

 (ii) Find an expression for the displacement of P from O at time t seconds. [3] 

 (iii) Find the acceleration of P when t = 3. [2] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/23/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

**7 (a)** The four points _O_ , _A_ , _B_ and _C_ are such that 

 OA = 5 a , OB = 15 b , OC = 24 b 3 a. 

 Show that B lies on the line AC. [3] 

 (b) Relative to an origin O , the position vector of the point P is i – 4 j and the position vector of the point Q is 3 i + 7 j. Find 

 (i) PQ , [2] 

 (ii) the unit vector in the direction PQ , [1] 

 (iii) the position vector of M , the mid-point of PQ. [2] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/23/M/J/15 

## 8 (a) (i) Find y e 4 x^ +^3 d x. [2] 

 (ii) Hence evaluate e d x . 

 4 x 3 2 5 

(^3) + 

## y. [2] 

 (b) (i) Find cos d 

 x x 3 

### J 

### L 

### KK 

### N 

### P 

## y OO. [2] 

 (ii) Hence evaluate cos d 

 x x 0 3 

 6 

_r_ (^) J 

### L 

### KK 

### N 

### P 

## y OO. [2] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/23/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

 (c) Find x^1 x d x 

 2 

## y ^^ -^ + h.^ [4] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/23/M/J/15 

**9 (a)** Find the set of values of _x_ for which 4 _x_^2 + 19 _x_ 5 G 0. [3] 

 (b) (i) Express x^2 + 8 x 9 in the form ^ x + a h^2 + b , where a and b are integers. [2] 

 (ii) Use your answer to part (i) to find the greatest value of 9 8 x x^2 and the value of x at which this occurs. [2] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/23/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

 (iii) Sketch the graph of y = 9 8 x x^2 , indicating the coordinates of any points of intersection with the coordinate axes. [2] 

 O x 

 y 


© UCLES 2015 0606/23/M/J/15 

**10** The relationship between experimental values of two variables, _x_ and _y_ , is given by _y_ = _Ab x_ , where _A_ and _b_ are constants. 

 (i) By transforming the relationship y = Ab x , show that plotting ln y against x should produce a straight line graph. [2] 

 (ii) The diagram below shows the results of plotting ln y against x for 7 different pairs of values of variables, x and y. A line of best fit has been drawn. 

### 6 

 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 x 

### 8 

### 10 

 ln y 

### 11 

### 12 

### 5 

### 7 

### 9 

 By taking readings from the diagram, find the value of A and of b , giving each value correct to 1 significant figure. [4] 

 (iii) Estimate the value of y when x = 2.5. [2] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/23/M/J/15 

### 11 

### A B 

### C 

###  

 The Venn diagram above shows the sets A , B and C. It is given that n ^ A , B , C h = 48 , n ^ A h = 30 , n ( B ) = 25 , n ( C ) = 15 , n ( A + B ) = 7 , n ^ B + C h = 6 , n ^ A l + B + C lh = 16. 

 (i) Find the value of x , where x = n^ A + B + C h. [3] 

 (ii) Find the value of y , where y = n^ A + B l+ C h. [3] 

 (iii) Hence show that A l + B l + C =Q. [1] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/23/M/J/15 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

### BLANK PAGE 


