 This document consists of 16 printed pages. 

 DC (NH/SW) 91465/1 © UCLES 2015 [Turn over 

* 8 8 7 8 4 1 0 8 4 3 * 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/22 Paper 2 May/June 2015 2 hours Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all the questions. Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 


© UCLES 2015 0606/22/M/J/15 

 Mathematical Formulae 

## 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

 x 

 b b ac a 

 = 

 − 2 − 4 2 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( _n_ 

# 1 ) a 

_n_ –1 (^) _b_ + 

# ( 

 n 

# 2 ) a 

_n_ –2 (^) _b_ (^2) + … + 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) a 

_n_ – _r_ (^) _br_ (^) + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( _n_ 

# r ) =^ 

 n! ( n – r )! r! 

## 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ 

 sin 2 A + cos^2 A = 1 

 sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A 

 cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC_ 

 a sin A =^ 

 b sin B =^ 

 c sin C 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

 ∆ = 

## 1 

 2 bc^ sin^ A 


© UCLES 2015 0606/22/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

**1** The universal set contains all the integers from 0 to 12 inclusive. Given that 

 A = {1, 2, 3, 8, 12}, B = {0, 2, 3, 4, 6} and C = {1, 2, 4, 6, 7, 9, 10}, 

 (i) complete the Venn diagram, [3] 

## A B 

## C 

##  

 (ii) state the value of n ( A l k B l k C ), [1] 

 (iii) write down the elements of the set A l k B k C. [1] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/22/M/J/15 

**2** The table shows the number of passengers in Economy class and in Business class on 3 flights from London to Paris. The table also shows the departure times for the 3 flights and the cost of a single ticket in each class. 

 Departure time Number of passengers in Economy class 

 Number of passengers in Business class 

 09 30 60 50 

 13 30 70 52 

 15 45 58 34 

 Single ticket price (£) 120 300 

 (i) Write down a matrix, P , for the numbers of passengers and a matrix, Q , of single ticket prices, such that the matrix product QP can be found. [2] 

 (ii) Find the matrix product QP. [2] 

 (iii) Given that 

## 1 

## 1 

## 1 

## R = 

## J 

## L 

## K 

## KK 

## N 

## P 

## O 

 OO, explain what information is found by evaluating the matrix product^ QPR. [1] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/22/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

**3 Do not use a calculator in this question.** 

## A 

 B cm 

## C 

## ( 6 + 3 5 ) 

 The diagram shows the right-angled triangle ABC , where AB = ^ 6 + 3 5 hcm and angle B = 90°. The 

 area of this triangle is 2 

## 36 15 5 

 cm 2 

## J + 

## L 

## KK 

## N 

## P 

## OO. 

 (i) Find the length of the side BC in the form ^ a^ + b 5 hcm^ , where a and b are integers. [3] 

 (ii) Find ^ AC^ h^2 in the form ^ c^ + d 5 h^ cm 2 , where c and d are integers. [2] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/22/M/J/15 

**4** A river, which is 80 m wide, flows at 2 ms –1^ between parallel, straight banks. A man wants to row his boat straight across the river and land on the other bank directly opposite his starting point. He is able to row his boat in still water at 3 ms –1. Find 

 (i) the direction in which he must row his boat, [2] 

 (ii) the time it takes him to cross the river. [3] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/22/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

**5** Solve the simultaneous equations 

 2 3 7 , 4. 

 x y xy x y 

(^2) + 2 = + = [5] **6 (a)** Solve 6 _x_^ -^2 = 41. [2] **(b)** Solve log (^) _a_ 2 _y_^2 + log (^) _a_ 8 + log (^) _a_ 16 _y_ log (^) _a_ 64 _y_ = 2 log _a_ 4. [4] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/22/M/J/15 

**7** In the expansion of ^ 1 + 2 _x_ h _n_ , the coefficient of _x_^4 is ten times the coefficient of _x_^2. Find the value of the positive integer, _n_. [6] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/22/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

## 8 

## B 

## A 

 O C x 

 y y^ =^ x^ + 10 

 y = x^2 – 6 x + 10 

 The graph of y = x^2 6 x + 10 cuts the y -axis at A. The graphs of y = x^2 6 x + 10 and y = x + 10 cut one another at A and B. The line BC is perpendicular to the x -axis. Calculate the area of the shaded region enclosed by the curve and the line AB , showing all your working. [8] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/22/M/J/15 

**9 Solutions by accurate drawing will not be accepted.** 

## O 

 y = mx + 4 

## 2 

## 4 

## –1 

## Q 

## R 

## P (2, 10) 

 x 

 y 

 The line y = mx + 4 meets the lines x = 2 and x =1 at the points P and Q respectively. The point R is such that QR is parallel to the y -axis and the gradient of RP is 1. The point P has coordinates (2, 10). 

 (i) Find the value of m. [2] 

 (ii) Find the y -coordinate of Q. [1] 

 (iii) Find the coordinates of R. [2] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/22/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

 (iv) Find the equation of the line through P , perpendicular to PQ , giving your answer in the form ax + by = c , where a , b and c are integers. [3] 

 (v) Find the coordinates of the midpoint, M , of the line PQ. [2] 

 (vi) Find the area of triangle QRM. [2] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/22/M/J/15 

**10 (a)** The function f is defined by f: _x_ 7 sin _x_ for 0° G _x_ G 360°. On the axes below, sketch the graph of _y_ = f( ) _x_. [2] 

_O_ (^) 90° 180° 270° 360° _x y_ **(b)** The functions g and hg are defined, for _x_ H 1 , by 4 3 , . _x_ ln _x x x_ g hg 

## = 

## = 

 ^ ^ ^ 

 h h h 

**(i)** Show that (^4) 

## 3 

 h x 

 e x = ^ h + 

. [2] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/22/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

 (ii) 

 O 1 x 

 y = g( x ) 

 y 

 The diagram shows the graph of y = g^ h x. Given that g and h are inverse functions, sketch, on the same diagram, the graph of y = h^ h x. Give the coordinates of any point where your graph meets the coordinate axes. [2] 

 (iii) State the domain of h. [1] 

 (iv) State the range of h. [1] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/22/M/J/15 

## 11 

## O 

## A 

## B C 

## D 

## Q 

_P_ (^) _S R h_ 

## 4 

## 8 

 The diagram shows a cuboid of height h units inside a right pyramid OPQRS of height 8 units and with square base of side 4 units. The base of the cuboid sits on the square base PQRS of the pyramid. The points A , B , C and D are corners of the cuboid and lie on the edges OP , OQ , OR and OS , respectively, of the pyramid OPQRS. The pyramids OPQRS and OABCD are similar. 

 (i) Find an expression for AD in terms of h and hence show that the volume V of the cuboid is given 

 by V h 4^ 4 h 16 h 

(^3 2) = + units^3. [4] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/22/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

 (ii) Given that h can vary, find the value of h for which V is a maximum. [4] 

 Question 12 is printed on the next page. 


© UCLES 2015 0606/22/M/J/15 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

**12 (i)** Show that _x_ = –2 is a root of the polynomial equation 15 _x_^3 + 26 _x_^2 11 _x_ 6 = 0. [1] 

 (ii) Find the remainder when 15 x^3 + 26 x^2 11 x 6 is divided by x – 3. [2] 

 (iii) Find the value of p and of q such that 15 x^3 + 26 x^2 11 x 6 is a factor of 15 x^4 + px^3 37 x^2 + qx + 6. [4] 


