 This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. 

 DC (ST/SW) 105918 © UCLES 2015 [Turn over 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

* 7 5 5 2 6 5 9 0 8 8 * 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/13 Paper 1 May/June 2015 2 hours Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all the questions. Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 


© UCLES 2015 0606/13/M/J/15 

 Mathematical Formulae 

## 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

 x a 

 b b ac 2 

## = -^!^2 -^4 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( _n_ 

# 1 ) a 

_n_ –1 (^) _b_ + 

# ( 

 n 

# 2 ) a 

_n_ –2 (^) _b_ (^2) + … + 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) a 

_n_ – _r_ (^) _br_ (^) + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( _n_ 

# r ) =^ 

 n! ( n – r )! r! 

## 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ 

 sin 2 A + cos^2 A = 1 

 sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A 

 cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC_ 

 a sin A =^ 

 b sin B =^ 

 c sin C 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

## ∆ =^ 

 1 2 

 bc sin A 


© UCLES 2015 0606/13/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

**1 (i)** State the period of sin 2 _x_. [1] 

 (ii) State the amplitude of 1 + 2 cos 3 x. [1] 

 (iii) On the axes below, sketch the graph of 

 (a) y = sin 2 x for 0 ° G x G 180 °, [1] 

 (b) y = 1 + 2 cos 3 x for 0 ° G x G 180 °. [2] 

## O 

## –2 

## 45° 90° 135° 180° 

## 2 

## 4 

## –4 

 y 

 x 

 (iv) State the number of solutions of sin 2 x 2 cos 3 x = 1 for 0 ° G x G 180 °. [1] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/13/M/J/15 

**2 Do not use a calculator in this question**. 

 ^ 4 + 3 2 h 

## B^ C 

 cm 

 cm 

## A 

 ^ 8 + 5 2 h 

 i rad 

 The diagram shows the triangle ABC where angle B is a right angle, AB = ^ 4 + 3 2 h^ cm, BC = ^ 8 + 5 2 h^ cm and angle BAC = i radians. Showing all your working, find 

 (i) tan i in the form a + b 2 , where a and b are integers, [2] 

 (ii) sec 2 i in the form c + d 2 , where c and d are integers. [3] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/13/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

**3 (i)** Find the first 4 terms in the expansion of ^ 2 + _x_ 2 6h^ in ascending powers of _x._ [3] 

 (ii) Find the term independent of x in the expansion of x x 

2 2 6 (^1 32) 2 ^ (^) + h (^) c m. [3] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/13/M/J/15 

**4 (a)** Given that the matrix _k_ 

## 2 4 

## 0 

## X = 

## J 

## L 

## KK 

## N 

## P 

 OO, find X^2 in terms of the constant k. [2] 

 (b) Given that the matrix 

 a b 

## 1 

## 5 

## A = 

## J 

## L 

## KK 

## N 

## P 

 OO and the matrix 6 

## 5 

## 3 

## 2 

## 6 

## 1 

## 3 

**A** (^) 1 (^1) = 

- 

## 

- 

## J 

## L 

## K 

## K 

## K 

## N 

## P 

## O 

## O 

## O 

 , find the value of each of the 

 integers a and b. [3] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/13/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

**5** The curve _y_ = _xy_ + _x_^2 4 intersects the line _y_ = 3 _x_ 1 at the points _A_ and _B_. Find the equation of the perpendicular bisector of the line _AB_. [8] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/13/M/J/15 

**6** The polynomial f ^ h _x_ = _ax_^3 15 _x_^2 + _bx_ 2 has a factor of 2 _x_ 1 and a remainder of 5 when divided by _x_ 1. 

 (i) Show that b = 8 and find the value of a. [4] 

 (ii) Using the values of a and b from part (i) , express f^ h x^ in the form ^ 2 x 1 h^ g^ h x , where g^ h x^ is a quadratic factor to be found. [2] 

 (iii) Show that the equation f ^ h x^ = 0 has only one real root. [2] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/13/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

**7** The point _A_ , where _x_ = 0 , lies on the curve 

 ln 

_y_ (^) _x x_ 1 

## 4 2 3 

= (^) ^ (^) + h 

. The normal to the curve at _A_ meets the _x_ -axis at the point _B_. 

 (i) Find the equation of this normal. [7] 

 (ii) Find the area of the triangle AOB , where O is the origin. [2] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/13/M/J/15 

**8** It is given that f ^ h _x_ = 3 e 2 _x_ for _x_ H 0 , 

 g ^ x h = ^ x + 2 h^2 + 5 for x H 0. 

 (i) Write down the range of f and of g. [2] 

 (ii) Find g -^1 , stating its domain. [3] 

 (iii) Find the exact solution of gf ^ h x^ = 41. [4] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/13/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

 (iv) Evaluate f l^ln 4 h. [2] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/13/M/J/15 

## 9 

## O 

## C 

## D 

## B 

 y 

 x 

 y = x^3 – 5 x^2 + 3 x + 10 

 y = 3 x + 10 

## A 

 The diagram shows parts of the line y = 3 x + 10 and the curve y = x^3 5 x^2 + 3 x + 10. The line and the curve both pass through the point A on the y -axis. The curve has a maximum at the point B and a minimum at the point C. The line through C , parallel to the y -axis, intersects the line y = 3 x + 10 at the point D. 

 (i) Show that the line AD is a tangent to the curve at A. [2] 

 (ii) Find the x -coordinate of B and of C. [3] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/13/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

 (iii) Find the area of the shaded region ABCD , showing all your working. [5] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/13/M/J/15 

**10 (a)** Solve 4 sin _x_ = cosec _x_ for 0 ° G _x_ G 360 °. [3] 

 (b) Solve tan 2 3 y 2 sec 3 y 2 = 0 for 0 ° G y G 180 °. [6] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/13/M/J/15 

 (c) Solve tan  z 3^ r j = 3 for 0 G z G 2 r radians. [3] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/13/M/J/15 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

## BLANK PAGE 


