 This syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 16 printed pages. 

 IB15 06_0610_11/2RP © UCLES 2015 [Turn over 

# *8833948694* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## BIOLOGY 0610/11 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice May/June 2015 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A, B, C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2015 0610/11/M/J/15 

1 The diagram illustrates some of the processes carried out by living organisms. 

 green plant chicken 

 waste products 

 waste products 

 carbon dioxide to atmosphere 

 oxygen from atmosphere 

## X 

 light energy 

 Which characteristic of living organisms is represented by arrow X? 

 A excretion 

 B nutrition 

 C respiration 

 D sensitivity 

2 What is a correct way of naming a species, according to the binomial system? 

 A Homo sapiens 

 B Homo Sapiens 

 C human being 

 D sapiens 


© UCLES 2015 0610/11/M/J/15 [Turn over 

3 The diagram shows four arthropods. 

 Pediculus × 20 

 Dermacentor × 7 

 Anopheles × 10 

 Carcinus ×0.5 

 How many of these arthropods are insects? 

 A 1 B 2 C 3 D 4 

4 The key can be used to distinguish between four different chemical substances. 

 Use the key to identify which substance could be a protein. 

 1 contains the element carbon ........................................... go to 2 

 does not contain carbon .................................................. A 

 2 contains the element nitrogen ......................................... B 

 does not contain nitrogen ............................................... go to 3 

 3 gives a positive result with Benedict’s test ...................... C 

 gives a negative result with Benedict’s test .................... D 


© UCLES 2015 0610/11/M/J/15 

5 The diagram shows two guard cells from a leaf. 

 Which labelled part would also be found in liver cells? 

 A 

 B 

## C 

## D 

6 The diagram shows part of a leaf in cross-section. 

## X 

## Y 

 Structures X and Y are both part of the same 

 A cell. 

 B organ. 

 C tissue. 

 D vessel. 


© UCLES 2015 0610/11/M/J/15 [Turn over 

7 The diagram shows a plant cell. 

 Which features show that it is a plant cell? 

 A It has a cell wall and a vacuole. 

 B It has a nucleus and cytoplasm. 

 C It has a nucleus but no chloroplasts. 

 D It has chloroplasts but no vacuole. 

8 In a section through a plant, a student found a group of long, microscopic structures. The structures lacked end walls, cytoplasm and nuclei. 

 Which identification and reason best matches the student’s observations? 

 identification reason 

 A root hair cells they do not contain a nucleus when mature 

 B root hair cells they do not contain cytoplasm to absorb water 

 C xylem vessels they can support the plant better without cytoplasm 

 D xylem vessels they need to be hollow to carry water efficiently 

9 The diagram shows a specialised cell cut in half. 

 What does this diagram indicate about the structure of this cell? 

 A The cell has a cell wall. 

 B The cell is concave on each side. 

 C The cell is long and thin. 

 D The cell is red and carries oxygen. 


© UCLES 2015 0610/11/M/J/15 

10 How do carbon dioxide and oxygen move in and out of a mesophyll cell? 

 A active transport 

 B diffusion 

 C respiration 

 D transpiration 

11 During osmosis, which molecules move and through which type of membrane? 

 molecules moving 

 type of membrane 

 A oxygen partially permeable 

 B oxygen permeable 

 C water partially permeable 

 D water permeable 

12 The diagram shows an experiment on the digestion of the protein in egg albumen by protease. 

 The protease was taken from a human stomach. 

 In which test-tube will the protein be digested most quickly? 

 A B C D 

 egg albumen + protease 

 egg albumen + dilute hydrochloric acid 

 egg albumen + dilute hydrochloric acid + protease 

 egg albumen + dilute hydrochloric acid + boiled protease 

 water-bath at 37 °C 

13 Which effect does a gradual decrease in pH from 13 to 1 have on the action of amylase? 

 A slows it down only 

 B slows it down then speeds it up 

 C speeds it up only 

 D speeds it up then slows it down 


© UCLES 2015 0610/11/M/J/15 [Turn over 

14 The diagram represents a protein molecule. 

 What do the small circles represent? 

 A amino acids 

 B fatty acids 

 C glycerol 

 D simple sugars 

15 Poor nutrition can lead to a condition called rickets in which bones fail to develop properly. 

 The table shows some minerals and vitamins present in four foods. 

 Which food would be best for a child who has rickets? 

 calcium iron vitamin C vitamin D 

 A     key 

 B     = substance present 

 C     = substance absent 

 D     

16 Which components make up most of the dry mass of a balanced diet? 

 A calcium compounds, carbohydrates and fats 

 B carbohydrates, fats and proteins 

 C fats, proteins and vitamins 

 D proteins, vitamins and calcium compounds 


© UCLES 2015 0610/11/M/J/15 

17 The diagram shows a plant shoot and the same shoot six hours later. 

 plant shoot same shoot six hours later 

 Which change in environmental conditions could cause this change in the shoot? 

 A a decrease in available water 

 B a decrease in light intensity 

 C a decrease in wind speed 

 D an increase in humidity 


© UCLES 2015 0610/11/M/J/15 [Turn over 

18 The diagrams show four different stages in one heart beat. 

 P Q 

## R S 

 direction in which blood is moving 

 key 

 What is the correct order for the stages after stage P? 

 A Q → R → S 

 B R → Q → S 

 C R → S → Q 

 D S → R → Q 

19 Why does chewing food speed up digestion? 

 A Bacteria in the food are killed. 

 B Food is mixed with protease. 

 C The surface area of the food is increased. 

 D The taste of food is improved. 

20 Which process in humans does not use energy released from respiration? 

 A cell division 

 B diffusion of oxygen 

 C muscle contraction 

 D protein synthesis 


© UCLES 2015 0610/11/M/J/15 

21 The graph shows the results of an experiment to investigate the rate of respiration of an organism at different temperatures. 

## 0 

## 0 

## 10 20 30 

 temperature / °C 

 rate of respiration 

## 40 50 60 

 What explains the difference between the rate of respiration at 50 °C and that at 30 °C? 

 A enzymes working faster at 50 °C 

 B enzymes working more slowly at 50 °C 

 C less oxygen available at 50 °C 

 D more oxygen available at 50 °C 

22 The diagram shows an experiment to investigate the respiration of yeast. 

 balloon 

 yeast in sugar solution 

 gas evolved 

 at the beginning after 24 hours 

 yeast, sugar and new compound 

 Which gas is evolved and which new compound is present after 24 hours? 

 gas evolved new compound 

 A carbon dioxide ethanol (alcohol) 

 B carbon dioxide lactic acid 

 C oxygen ethanol (alcohol) 

 D oxygen lactic acid 


© UCLES 2015 0610/11/M/J/15 [Turn over 

23 Which function does not occur in the kidneys? 

 A breakdown of alcohol 

 B removal of excess salts from the blood 

 C removal of excess water from the blood 

 D removal of urea from the blood 

24 What is urea formed from? 

 A amino acids 

 B fatty acids 

 C glucose 

 D glycerol 

25 What is not an effect of consumption of alcohol? 

 A liver damage 

 B loss of muscle coordination 

 C poor self control 

 D stimulation of the nervous system 

26 Which labelled part of the eye contains muscle? 

# C 

# D 

# A 

# B 

27 Which method of birth control is based on knowing the stage of a woman’s menstrual cycle? 

 A condom 

 B contraceptive pill 

 C diaphragm 

 D rhythm method 


© UCLES 2015 0610/11/M/J/15 

28 The diagram shows some changes which take place during a woman’s menstrual cycle. 

## 0 

## 0 

## 7 14 

 time / days 

## 21 28 

 relative hormone concentration 

 oestrogen progesterone 

 Assuming ovulation occurs on day 14, what is occurring at the time of ovulation? 

 A a fall in the levels of oestrogen and progesterone 

 B a fall in the level of progesterone only 

 C a rise in the level of oestrogen 

 D a rise in the level of progesterone and fall in the level of oestrogen 

29 Development is defined as an increase in 

 A complexity. 

 B dry mass. 

 C number of cells. 

 D size. 

30 In addition to a suitable temperature, what else is always necessary for seed germination? 

 A carbon dioxide and sunlight 

 B mineral ions 

 C sunlight and water 

 D water and oxygen 

31 A genetic cross between two organisms may be shown as Gg × Gg. 

 What does g represent? 

 A a dominant allele 

 B a dominant chromosome 

 C a recessive allele 

 D a recessive chromosome 


© UCLES 2015 0610/11/M/J/15 [Turn over 

32 Some fruit flies have orange eyes and others have red eyes. 

 If two orange-eyed fruit flies are crossed, their offspring always have orange eyes. 

 If two red-eyed fruit flies are crossed, their offspring sometimes include both orange-eyed and red-eyed flies. 

 What can be concluded from these observations? 

 A Crossing an orange-eyed fly with a red-eyed fly will produce a 1 : 1 ratio in the offspring. 

 B The allele for orange eyes is dominant. 

 C The allele for red eyes is dominant. 

 D We could determine which allele is dominant only by doing a cross that produces a 3 : 1 ratio. 

33 What can be continuously recycled in ecosystems? 

 carbon energy water 

 A    

 B    

 C    

 D    

34 Which diagram shows a pyramid of biomass for a woodland? 

 A B 

## C D 


© UCLES 2015 0610/11/M/J/15 

35 Which of the following is an example of a food chain? 

 A carnivore → herbivore → producer 

 B flower → fruit → seed 

 C grass → antelope → lion 

 D starch → maltose→ glucose 

36 The diagram shows the movements of water between oceans, land and the air. The figures are based on an annual mean precipitation of 100 units. 

 oceans land 

 evaporation 

## 84 

 precipitation (rain, snow, hail, sleet, etc) 

## 77 23 

 transpiration evaporation 

## X 

 What is the total of evaporation from the land and transpiration from plants at X? 

 A 7 B 13 C 16 D 77 


© UCLES 2015 0610/11/M/J/15 [Turn over 

37 What is shown in the diagram? 

 air 

 plant animal 

 fossil fuel photosynthesis 

 respiration 

 burning 

 decomposition 

 A a food web 

 B non-cyclical energy flow 

 C the carbon cycle 

 D the water cycle 

38 The table shows the birth rates and death rates in four countries. 

 Which country will double its population most quickly? 

 birth rate / % population 

 death rate / % population 

 A 5.0 4.0 

 B 4.5 2.5 

 C 3.5 2.0 

 D 3.0 3.0 

39 Which two gases both contribute to global warming? 

 A carbon dioxide and methane 

 B methane and oxygen 

 C oxygen and sulfur dioxide 

 D sulfur dioxide and carbon dioxide 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2015 0610/11/M/J/15 

40 Lichens are organisms that do not grow well in air containing sulfur dioxide. 

 Which graph shows the change in number of lichen species from the centre of an industrial city to the countryside 15 km away? 

 distance from city centre / km 

## A 

## 0 

## 0 15 

 distance from city centre / km 

## B 

## 0 

## 0 15 

 distance from city centre / km 

## C 

## 0 

## 0 15 

 distance from city centre / km 

## D 

## 0 

## 0 15 

 number of lichen species 

 number of lichen species 

 number of lichen species 

 number of lichen species 


