 This syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 18 printed pages and 2 blank pages. 

 IB15 06_0610_12/2RP © UCLES 2015 [Turn over 

# *6782855144* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## BIOLOGY 0610/12 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice May/June 2015 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A, B, C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2015 0610/12/M/J/15 

1 The diagram illustrates some of the processes carried out by living organisms. 

 green plant chicken 

 waste products 

 waste products 

 carbon dioxide to atmosphere 

 oxygen from atmosphere 

## X 

 light energy 

 Which characteristic of living organisms is represented by arrow X? 

 A excretion 

 B nutrition 

 C respiration 

 D sensitivity 

2 The statements describe four different plants. 

 Which plant must be a monocotyledon? 

 A The flowers are wind-pollinated. 

 B The flowers each have five petals. 

 C The leaves are large with a clear network of veins on them. 

 D The leaves have parallel veins. 


© UCLES 2015 0610/12/M/J/15 [Turn over 

3 The diagram shows four arthropods. 

 Pediculus × 20 

 Dermacentor × 7 

 Anopheles × 10 

 Carcinus ×0.5 

 How many of these arthropods are insects? 

 A 1 B 2 C 3 D 4 


© UCLES 2015 0610/12/M/J/15 

4 The diagram shows an animal. 

 Use the key to identify this animal. 

 1 body covered with scales ...................... go to 2 body covered with hair .......................... go to 3 

 2 has a rounded bill .................................. A has a pointed bill ................................... B 

 3 has webbed feet .................................... C does not have webbed feet ................... D 

5 Which diagram shows chloroplasts in their correct position in a plant cell? 

 A B C D 


© UCLES 2015 0610/12/M/J/15 [Turn over 

6 The diagram shows a plant cell. 

 Which features show that it is a plant cell? 

 A It has a cell wall and a vacuole. 

 B It has a nucleus and cytoplasm. 

 C It has a nucleus but no chloroplasts. 

 D It has chloroplasts but no vacuole. 

7 Which is not an organ? 

 A blood 

 B heart 

 C tooth 

 D vein 

8 What results from the destruction of cilia in the trachea due to smoking? 

 A Cilia cannot filter bacteria. 

 B Cilia cannot trap dust. 

 C Mucus cannot be manufactured. 

 D Mucus cannot be carried towards the throat. 

9 How do carbon dioxide and oxygen move in and out of a mesophyll cell? 

 A active transport 

 B diffusion 

 C respiration 

 D transpiration 


© UCLES 2015 0610/12/M/J/15 

10 Which statements are correct for both diffusion and osmosis? 

 involves movement of water only 

 requires energy from the cell 

 molecules move from higher concentration to lower concentration 

 A    

 B    

 C    

 D    

11 An enzyme in potato cells causes oxygen to be produced from hydrogen peroxide. 

 Cubes of potato were incubated with hydrogen peroxide at different temperatures. 

 The numbers of bubbles of oxygen released per minute were counted at each temperature. 

 The table shows the results. 

 temperature / °C 15 25 35 45 55 

 number of bubbles / bubbles per minute 96 98 82 36 1 

 The results suggest the optimum temperature for the enzyme is between which two values? 

 A 15 °C and 35 °C 

 B 35 °C and 45 °C 

 C 35 °C and 55 °C 

 D 45 °C and 55 °C 


© UCLES 2015 0610/12/M/J/15 [Turn over 

12 The diagram shows an experiment on the digestion of the protein in egg albumen by protease. 

 The protease was taken from a human stomach. 

 In which test-tube will the protein be digested most quickly? 

 A B C D 

 egg albumen + protease 

 egg albumen + dilute hydrochloric acid 

 egg albumen + dilute hydrochloric acid + protease 

 egg albumen + dilute hydrochloric acid + boiled protease 

 water-bath at 37 °C 

13 Which row shows the elements and basic units that are used in the construction of large food molecules? 

 food molecules elements basic units 

 A fats carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen glucose 

 B fats carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen glycerol 

 C starch carbon, hydrogen, oxygen glucose 

 D starch carbon, hydrogen, oxygen glycerol 


© UCLES 2015 0610/12/M/J/15 

14 The diagram shows part of the human alimentary canal. 

 In which part does protein digestion begin? 

 A 

 B 

## C 

## D 

15 Poor nutrition can lead to a condition called rickets in which bones fail to develop properly. 

 The table shows some minerals and vitamins present in four foods. 

 Which food would be best for a child who has rickets? 

 calcium iron vitamin C vitamin D 

 A     key 

 B     = substance present 

 C     = substance absent 

 D     


© UCLES 2015 0610/12/M/J/15 [Turn over 

16 The diagram shows a plant shoot and the same shoot six hours later. 

 plant shoot same shoot six hours later 

 Which change in environmental conditions could cause this change in the shoot? 

 A a decrease in available water 

 B a decrease in light intensity 

 C a decrease in wind speed 

 D an increase in humidity 

17 A celery stalk is placed in a beaker of blue dye. Once the dye reaches the leaves, the stalk is taken out and cut in half. 

 celery stalk 

 blue dye 

 cut 

 Which diagram shows the appearance of the cut end of the stalk? 

 A B C D 

 blue dye blue dye blue dye 


© UCLES 2015 0610/12/M/J/15 

18 Why does chewing food speed up digestion? 

 A Bacteria in the food are killed. 

 B Food is mixed with protease. 

 C The surface area of the food is increased. 

 D The taste of food is improved. 

19 The table shows the composition of four samples of air. 

 air sample percentage ofoxygen carbon dioxidepercentage of percentagehumidity 

## P 21 0.04 20 

## Q 16 4.04 100 

## R 4 0.40 80 

## S 20 4.00 60 

 Which sample is inspired air and which sample is expired air? 

 sample breathed in 

 sample breathed out 

 A P Q 

 B P S 

 C Q R 

 D Q S 


© UCLES 2015 0610/12/M/J/15 [Turn over 

20 The diagram shows an experiment to investigate the respiration of yeast. 

 balloon 

 yeast in sugar solution 

 gas evolved 

 at the beginning after 24 hours 

 yeast, sugar and new compound 

 Which gas is evolved and which new compound is present after 24 hours? 

 gas evolved new compound 

 A carbon dioxide ethanol (alcohol) 

 B carbon dioxide lactic acid 

 C oxygen ethanol (alcohol) 

 D oxygen lactic acid 

21 In which conditions do the leaves of a green plant respire? 

 bright light darkness 

 A   

 B   

 C   

 D   

22 Which two substances are both reabsorbed in the kidneys? 

 A glucose and salts 

 B glucose and starch 

 C glycogen and salts 

 D glycogen and starch 


© UCLES 2015 0610/12/M/J/15 

23 Which organ makes urea? 

 A bladder 

 B kidney 

 C liver 

 D stomach 

24 What are correct descriptions of mitosis and meiosis? 

 mitosis meiosis 

 A cells produced are genetically identical repairs damaged cells 

 B halves the chromosome number cells produced are genetically identical 

 C involved in asexual reproduction halves the chromosome number 

 D involved in sexual reproduction doubles the chromosome number 

25 The diagram shows two antagonistic muscles and the directions of movement that they produce. 

## P 

## Q 

## R 

## S 

 direction of movement 

 Which row correctly identifies these muscles and the directions of movement they produce on contraction? 

 muscle P muscle Q 

 name movement name movement 

 A biceps R triceps S 

 B biceps S triceps R 

 C triceps R biceps S 

 D triceps S biceps R 


© UCLES 2015 0610/12/M/J/15 [Turn over 

26 The diagram shows a germinating broad bean seed which has been cut in half. 

## 1 

## 2 

## 3 

## 4 

 Which labels show the cotyledon and the plumule? 

 cotyledon plumule 

 A 1 3 

 B 1 4 

 C 2 3 

 D 2 4 

27 The diagram shows some changes which take place during a woman’s menstrual cycle. 

## 0 

## 0 

## 7 14 

 time / days 

## 21 28 

 relative hormone concentration 

 oestrogen progesterone 

 Assuming ovulation occurs on day 14, what is occurring at the time of ovulation? 

 A a fall in the levels of oestrogen and progesterone 

 B a fall in the level of progesterone only 

 C a rise in the level of oestrogen 

 D a rise in the level of progesterone and fall in the level of oestrogen 


© UCLES 2015 0610/12/M/J/15 

28 In addition to a suitable temperature, what else is always necessary for seed germination? 

 A carbon dioxide and sunlight 

 B mineral ions 

 C sunlight and water 

 D water and oxygen 

29 What defines the development of an organism? 

 A increase in age 

 B increase in complexity 

 C increase in height 

 D increase in length 

30 A man has three sons. 

 What is the chance of his next child being a son? 

 A 0% B 25% C 50% D 75% 

31 The diagram shows a cross between heterozygous tall pea plants. 

 parental genotypes Tt × Tt 

 gametes T t T t 

 offspring E F G H 

 Which statement is not correct? 

 A Offspring E and H are both homozygous. 

 B Offspring F and G are both heterozygous. 

 C The phenotypes of offspring E, F and G are the same. 

 D The ratio of different phenotypes in the offspring is 1 : 1. 


© UCLES 2015 0610/12/M/J/15 [Turn over 

32 The bar chart shows the heights of pea plants grown from 500 pea seeds. 

 number of pea plants 

 height of plants 

 What variation do the plants show? 

 A continuous variation only 

 B discontinuous variation only 

 C both continuous variation and discontinuous variation 

 D neither continuous variation nor discontinuous variation 

33 Which pair of statements about energy flow in ecosystems is correct? 

 energy entering the ecosystem from the Sun nature of energy flow 

 A light and chemical cyclical 

 B light and chemical non-cyclical 

 C light and heat cyclical 

 D light and heat non-cyclical 

34 The diagram shows a food chain based on a tree. 

 tree aphids beetles birds 

 Which diagram shows a pyramid of numbers for this food chain? 

 A B C D 


© UCLES 2015 0610/12/M/J/15 

35 Which process forms part of the carbon cycle? 

 A combustion 

 B evaporation 

 C osmosis 

 D transpiration 

36 Herbivores take in carbon atoms from plants. 

 How do carbon atoms leave the herbivores? 

 in faeces in respiration 

 through death and decay 

 A    

 B    

 C    

 D    

37 In which stages in the water cycle is the water in vapour form? 

 absorption by plant roots 

 movement from sea to clouds precipitation^ transpiration 

 A     

 B     

 C     

 D     


© UCLES 2015 0610/12/M/J/15 [Turn over 

38 The graph shows how the population of the world has increased from 1650 until the present day. 

## 1700 1800 

 year 

## 1900 2000 

## 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 

 world population / billions 

## P 

 What stage in the sigmoid population growth curve is represented by region P? 

 A death phase 

 B exponential (log) phase 

 C lag phase 

 D stationary phase 


© UCLES 2015 0610/12/M/J/15 

39 Lichens are organisms that do not grow well in air containing sulfur dioxide. 

 Which graph shows the change in number of lichen species from the centre of an industrial city to the countryside 15 km away? 

 distance from city centre / km 

## A 

## 0 

## 0 15 

 distance from city centre / km 

## B 

## 0 

## 0 15 

 distance from city centre / km 

## C 

## 0 

## 0 15 

 distance from city centre / km 

## D 

## 0 

## 0 15 

 number of lichen species 

 number of lichen species 

 number of lichen species 

 number of lichen species 

40 Which two gases both contribute to global warming? 

 A carbon dioxide and methane 

 B methane and oxygen 

 C oxygen and sulfur dioxide 

 D sulfur dioxide and carbon dioxide 


© UCLES 2015 0610/12/M/J/15 

## BLANK PAGE 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2015 0610/12/M/J/15 

## BLANK PAGE 


