 This syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 17 printed pages and 3 blank pages. 

 IB15 06_0610_13/3RP © UCLES 2015 [Turn over 

# *5756420182* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## BIOLOGY 0610/13 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice May/June 2015 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A, B, C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2015 0610/13/M/J/15 

1 The diagram illustrates some of the processes carried out by living organisms. 

 green plant chicken 

 waste products 

 waste products 

 carbon dioxide to atmosphere 

 oxygen from atmosphere 

## X 

 light energy 

 Which characteristic of living organisms is represented by arrow X? 

 A excretion 

 B nutrition 

 C respiration 

 D sensitivity 

2 All fish, all birds and all mammals are 

 A animals with internal fertilisation. 

 B carnivores. 

 C vertebrates. 

 D warm-blooded animals. 


© UCLES 2015 0610/13/M/J/15 [Turn over 

3 The diagram shows four arthropods. 

 Pediculus × 20 

 Dermacentor × 7 

 Anopheles × 10 

 Carcinus ×0.5 

 How many of these arthropods are insects? 

 A 1 B 2 C 3 D 4 


© UCLES 2015 0610/13/M/J/15 

4 The diagram shows an animal. 

 Use the key to identify the animal. 

 1 has two wings ...................................................... go to 2 has four wings ..................................................... go to 3 

 2 has antennae much shorter than legs ................. A has antennae about the same length as legs ...... B 

 3 has feathery antennae ......................................... C has smooth antennae .......................................... D 

5 The diagram shows a plant cell. 

 Which features show that it is a plant cell? 

 A It has a cell wall and a vacuole. 

 B It has a nucleus and cytoplasm. 

 C It has a nucleus but no chloroplasts. 

 D It has chloroplasts but no vacuole. 


© UCLES 2015 0610/13/M/J/15 [Turn over 

6 The cell shown in the diagram has been magnified 3000 times. The diagram is 21 mm wide. 

 What is the actual diameter of the cell? 

 A 21 mm 

## B 

## 3000 

## 21 

 mm 

 C 21 x 3000 mm 

## D 

## 21 

## 3000 

 mm 

7 Xylem is an example of 

 A a cell. 

 B a tissue. 

 C an organ. 

 D an organ system. 

8 The diagram shows a cross-section through a plant root. 

## Q 

 Q shows the part that is stained red when the root is placed in water containing a red dye. 

 What is found at Q? 

 A guard cells 

 B palisade cells 

 C phloem 

 D xylem 


© UCLES 2015 0610/13/M/J/15 

9 How do carbon dioxide and oxygen move in and out of a mesophyll cell? 

 A active transport 

 B diffusion 

 C respiration 

 D transpiration 

10 The diagram shows an experiment set up to investigate osmosis in living cells. 

 water (X) 

 glass dish 

 potato 

 concentrated sugar solution (Y) 

 What happens to the volumes of water (X) and sugar solution (Y) after 12 hours? 

 volume of water (X) volume of sugar solution (Y) 

 A decreases increases 

 B increases increases 

 C increases remains the same 

 D remains the same decreases 

11 The diagram shows an experiment on the digestion of the protein in egg albumen by protease. 

 The protease was taken from a human stomach. 

 In which test-tube will the protein be digested most quickly? 

 A B C D 

 egg albumen + protease 

 egg albumen + dilute hydrochloric acid 

 egg albumen + dilute hydrochloric acid + protease 

 egg albumen + dilute hydrochloric acid + boiled protease 

 water-bath at 37 °C 


© UCLES 2015 0610/13/M/J/15 [Turn over 

12 Which graph shows the effect of temperature between 20 °C and 35 °C on the activity of a human digestive enzyme? 

 rate of reaction 

## 20 35 

## A 

 temperature / °C 

 temperature / °C 

 temperature / °C 

 temperature / °C 

 rate of reaction 

## 20 35 

## B 

 rate of reaction 

## 20 35 

## C 

 rate of reaction 

## 20 35 

## D 

13 Which product of photosynthesis moves out of a green leaf through its stomata? 

 A carbon dioxide 

 B glucose 

 C oxygen 

 D water 

14 Poor nutrition can lead to a condition called rickets in which bones fail to develop properly. 

 The table shows some minerals and vitamins present in four foods. 

 Which food would be best for a child who has rickets? 

 calcium iron vitamin C vitamin D 

 A     key 

 B     = substance present 

 C     = substance absent 

 D     


© UCLES 2015 0610/13/M/J/15 

15 A person ate food X. Food X was not affected by enzymes until it reached the duodenum. 

 What was in food X? 

 A fat 

 B mineral ion 

 C protein 

 D starch 

16 The diagram shows a plant shoot and the same shoot six hours later. 

 plant shoot same shoot six hours later 

 Which change in environmental conditions could cause this change in the shoot? 

 A a decrease in available water 

 B a decrease in light intensity 

 C a decrease in wind speed 

 D an increase in humidity 

17 Why does chewing food speed up digestion? 

 A Bacteria in the food are killed. 

 B Food is mixed with protease. 

 C The surface area of the food is increased. 

 D The taste of food is improved. 

18 Where does haemoglobin become oxyhaemoglobin? 

 A heart 

 B kidneys 

 C liver 

 D lungs 


© UCLES 2015 0610/13/M/J/15 [Turn over 

19 The diagram shows an experiment to investigate the respiration of yeast. 

 balloon 

 yeast in sugar solution 

 gas evolved 

 at the beginning after 24 hours 

 yeast, sugar and new compound 

 Which gas is evolved and which new compound is present after 24 hours? 

 gas evolved new compound 

 A carbon dioxide ethanol (alcohol) 

 B carbon dioxide lactic acid 

 C oxygen ethanol (alcohol) 

 D oxygen lactic acid 

20 A girl holds her breath for 30 seconds, breathes out, and then breathes in. 

 Compared with the air she breathes out, the air she breathes in contains less 

 A carbon dioxide and water vapour. 

 B nitrogen and water vapour. 

 C oxygen and carbon dioxide. 

 D oxygen and nitrogen. 

21 Why does anaerobic respiration in muscles release less energy than aerobic respiration? 

 A Energy is lost in carbon dioxide. 

 B Energy is lost in oxygen. 

 C Energy remains trapped in ethanol. 

 D Energy remains trapped in lactic acid. 


© UCLES 2015 0610/13/M/J/15 

22 What is the function of the kidney? 

 A making glucose and reabsorbing urea 

 B making urea and removing salts 

 C removing glucose and reabsorbing salts 

 D removing urea and reabsorbing glucose 

23 How does the skin react when the body becomes very warm? 

 blood vessels sweat production 

 A dilate almost stops 

 B dilate increases 

 C move towards skin surface almost stops 

 D move towards skin surface increases 

24 Which diagram shows a sensory neurone? 

## A 

## C D 

## B 


© UCLES 2015 0610/13/M/J/15 [Turn over 

25 The diagram shows the muscles that control the size of the pupil in an eye. 

 radial muscles 

 iris 

 pupil 

 circular muscles 

 How do the muscles make the pupil smaller? 

 circular muscles radial muscles 

 A contract contract 

 B contract relax 

 C relax contract 

 D relax relax 

26 The diagram shows some changes which take place during a woman’s menstrual cycle. 

## 0 

## 0 

## 7 14 

 time / days 

## 21 28 

 relative hormone concentration 

 oestrogen progesterone 

 Assuming ovulation occurs on day 14, what is occurring at the time of ovulation? 

 A a fall in the levels of oestrogen and progesterone 

 B a fall in the level of progesterone only 

 C a rise in the level of oestrogen 

 D a rise in the level of progesterone and fall in the level of oestrogen 


© UCLES 2015 0610/13/M/J/15 

27 The diagram shows a process in plant reproduction. 

 stamen carpel 

 anther stigma 

## X 

 Which process is represented by arrow X? 

 A fertilisation 

 B pollen tube growth 

 C pollination 

 D seed dispersal 

28 In addition to a suitable temperature, what else is always necessary for seed germination? 

 A carbon dioxide and sunlight 

 B mineral ions 

 C sunlight and water 

 D water and oxygen 


© UCLES 2015 0610/13/M/J/15 [Turn over 

29 The graph shows how human height changes with age. 

 200 

## 100 

## 0 

## 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 

 height / cm 

 age / years 

 In which age range is the growth rate slowest? 

 A 0–2 years 

 B 8–10 years 

 C 12–14 years 

 D 18–20 years 

30 The diagram shows a plant cell. 

 Where is most of the DNA found? 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 


© UCLES 2015 0610/13/M/J/15 

31 The diagram shows the chromosomes in the nucleus of a cell that divides by mitosis. 

 Which diagram shows the chromosomes in the nucleus of one of the daughter cells produced? 

 A B C D 

32 The diagram shows the fusion of gametes to produce a son and a daughter. 

 parents 

 gametes 

 offspring 

 son daughter 

 father mother 

## R 

## Q 

 What are the sex chromosomes in gamete Q and son R? 

## Q R 

## A X XX 

## B X XY 

## C Y XX 

## D Y XY 


© UCLES 2015 0610/13/M/J/15 [Turn over 

33 Which organisms can be sources of energy for decomposers? 

 producers herbivores carnivores 

 A    

 B    

 C    

 D    

34 The diagram shows a pyramid of biomass for all organisms in an ecosystem. 

## P 

## Q 

## R 

## S 

 Which organisms are carnivores? 

 A P and Q B P and R C Q and R D R and S 

35 The diagram shows a food chain. 

 producer consumer 1 

 consumer 2 

 consumer 3 

 A disease reduced the numbers of consumer 3. 

 What would be the likely effect of this on the numbers of consumer 1 and consumer 2? 

 consumer 1 consumer 2 

 A decrease decrease 

 B decrease increase 

 C increase decrease 

 D increase increase 

36 Which process removes carbon dioxide from the atmosphere? 

 A combustion 

 B decomposition 

 C photosynthesis 

 D respiration 


© UCLES 2015 0610/13/M/J/15 

37 In which labelled stage in the water cycle is the water in vapour form? 

 land 

 sea river 

## A 

## B C 

## D 

 plant roots 

38 The graph shows a growth curve for a population of yeast. 

## 0 

 number of yeast cells 

 0 time 

 exponential (log) phase 

 stationary phase 

 death phase 

 lag phase 

 Which two phases of the growth curve are caused by factors such as predation, disease or lack of food? 

 A exponential (log) and death 

 B exponential (log) and stationary 

 C lag and exponential (log) 

 D stationary and death 

39 Which two gases both contribute to global warming? 

 A carbon dioxide and methane 

 B methane and oxygen 

 C oxygen and sulfur dioxide 

 D sulfur dioxide and carbon dioxide 


© UCLES 2015 0610/13/M/J/15 

40 Lichens are organisms that do not grow well in air containing sulfur dioxide. 

 Which graph shows the change in number of lichen species from the centre of an industrial city to the countryside 15 km away? 

 distance from city centre / km 

## A 

## 0 

## 0 15 

 distance from city centre / km 

## B 

## 0 

## 0 15 

 distance from city centre / km 

## C 

## 0 

## 0 15 

 distance from city centre / km 

## D 

## 0 

## 0 15 

 number of lichen species 

 number of lichen species 

 number of lichen species 

 number of lichen species 


© UCLES 2015 0610/13/M/J/15 

## BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2015 0610/13/M/J/15 

## BLANK PAGE 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2015 0610/13/M/J/15 

## BLANK PAGE 


