 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 18 printed pages and 2 blank pages. 

 IB15 11_0610_12_ML/FP © UCLES 2015 [Turn over 

# *7524335656* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## BIOLOGY 0610/12 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice October/November 2015 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) MODIFIED LANGUAGE 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2015 0610/12/O/N/15 

**1** Some lizards detach their tails when threatened by a predator. 

 Which characteristic is shown? 

 A excretion 

 B growth 

 C reproduction 

 D sensitivity 

**2** The diagram shows a key for five vertebrates. 

## START HERE 

 has legs 

 has feathers 

 organism U 

 has scales 

 organism V organism W 

 has no scales 

 has no feathers 

 has no legs 

 organism T 

 Which class of vertebrates does organism W belong to? 

 A amphibians 

 B birds 

 C fish 

 D reptiles 


© UCLES 2015 0610/12/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

**3** The diagram shows an animal whose scientific name is _Rattus rattus_. 

 Which genus does it belong to? 

 A mammal 

 B rattus 

 C Rattus 

 D vertebrate 

**4** The diagram shows a cross-section of part of a leaf. 

 upper epidermis 

 lower epidermis 

 midrib 

 layer X 

 Which type of cell is found in layer X? 

 A B C D 

**5** The diagram shows a student’s drawing of two guard cells. 

 Which label line is not correct? 

 A chloroplast 

 B cell membrane 

 C vacuole 

 D cell wall 


© UCLES 2015 0610/12/O/N/15 

**6** How does a liver cell differ from a palisade cell? 

 A A liver cell has a membrane. 

 B A liver cell has a vacuole. 

 C A liver cell has no cell wall. 

 D A liver cell has no cytoplasm. 

**7** The diagram shows structures taken from two different organisms. 

 P Q R S 

 (cells not drawn to scale) 

 Which structures have the main function of transport? 

 A P and R B P and S C Q and R D Q and S 

**8** At which level of organisation is a root? 

 A organ 

 B organ system 

 C organism 

 D tissue 


© UCLES 2015 0610/12/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

**9** The diagram shows a plant cell. 

 What is the appearance of this cell after it has been placed in pure water for 30 minutes? 

 A B 

## C D 

**10** A student cuts out four pieces of carrot root of equal size. The pieces are treated as shown in the diagram, and then left for two hours. 

 After two hours, which piece of carrot will be the smallest? 

 boiled carrot 

## A 

 sugar solution 

 boiled carrot 

## B 

 water 

 fresh carrot 

## C 

 sugar solution 

 fresh carrot 

## D 

 water 


© UCLES 2015 0610/12/O/N/15 

**11** The diagram shows the effect of an enzyme working in the human digestive system. 

 protein amino acids 

 enzyme at pH 1.5 

 and temperature 37 °C 

 What would reduce the rate of production of amino acids? 

 A removing the amino acids as they are formed 

 B increasing the amount of protein 

 C raising the temperature to 40 °C 

 D raising the pH to 7.5 

**12** Which substance catalyses the breakdown of fats to fatty acids and glycerol? 

 A adrenaline 

 B alcohol 

 C bile 

 D lipase 

**13** An experiment was done using the apparatus shown in the diagram. 

 The carbon dioxide content of the water in each tube was measured at the start and again three hours later. 

 In which tube would there be a decrease in carbon dioxide content? 

 A B C D 

 black polythene to keep out light 

 water 

 water plant 

 water snail 

 light light light 


© UCLES 2015 0610/12/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

**14** What is formed first in a leaf as a result of photosynthesis? 

 A chlorophyll 

 B glucose 

 C starch 

 D water 

**15** A plant with striped leaves similar to the one below was kept in bright light for six hours. 

 white stripe 

 green stripe 

 A leaf was taken from the plant and the chlorophyll removed. The leaf was then tested for starch using iodine solution. 

 Which diagram shows the result of the test? 

 yellow-brown 

 blue-black 

## A 

 white 

 blue-black 

## B 

 blue-black 

 green 

## C 

 yellow-brown 

 green 

## D 

**16** From which part of a leaf does most water evaporate during transpiration? 

 A the cuticle 

 B the guard cells 

 C the spongy mesophyll cells 

 D the xylem vessels 

**17** In which order does water pass through the cells of a plant, as the water travels from the roots to a leaf? 

 A mesophyll cells → root hair → root cortex → xylem 

 B root cortex → root hair → xylem → mesophyll cells 

 C root hair → mesophyll cells → root cortex → xylem 

 D root hair → root cortex → xylem → mesophyll cells 


© UCLES 2015 0610/12/O/N/15 

**18** The diagram shows a vertical section through a human heart. 

## Y 

## X 

 What are X and Y? 

## X Y 

 A left atrium right ventricle 

 B left ventricle right atrium 

 C right atrium left ventricle 

 D right ventricle left atrium 


© UCLES 2015 0610/12/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

**19** The diagram shows the composition of four samples of air (O 2 = oxygen, CO 2 = carbon dioxide, N 2 = nitrogen). 

## 100 

## 80 

## 60 

## 40 

## 20 

## 0 

 composition / % 

## O 2 CO 2 N 2 O 2 CO 2 N 2 O 2 CO 2 N 2 O 2 CO 2 

## K L M N 

N (^2) Which sample is inspired air and which sample is expired air? inspired air expired air **A** K N **B** L K **C** M L **D** N M **20** The diagram shows apparatus used to investigate anaerobic respiration in yeast. yeast in a glucose solution glass tube coloured liquid air from which oxygen has been removed What happens to the coloured liquid? **A** moves rapidly to the left **B** moves slowly to the left **C** moves to the right **D** stays still 


© UCLES 2015 0610/12/O/N/15 

**21** The diagram shows some organs in which urea is found. 

## P 

## Q 

## R 

 Which organ makes urea, and which organ removes it from the blood? 

 makes urea removes ureafrom blood 

## A P Q 

## B Q Q 

## C Q R 

## D R P 

**22** What is a function of the kidneys of a healthy person? 

 A break down toxins 

 B eliminate all salts 

 C reabsorb all glucose 

 D retain all water 


© UCLES 2015 0610/12/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

**23** The diagram shows a capillary loop in the skin of a mammal. 

 capillary loop 

 What will the capillary loop look like if the mammal becomes cold? 

 A B C D 

**24** The diagram shows a section through part of the eye. 

 suspensory ligaments 

 iris 

 pupil 

 lens 

## X 

 X is a contracted ciliary muscle. 

 What will happen when it relaxes? 

 A The lens will decrease its curvature. 

 B The lens will increase its curvature. 

 C The size of the pupil will decrease. 

 D The size of the pupil will increase. 


© UCLES 2015 0610/12/O/N/15 

**25** The diagram shows a timeline of a woman’s menstrual cycle, which lasts for 28 days. 

(^21) 

## 3 

## 4 

## 5 

## 6 

## 7 

## 8 

## 9 

## 10 

## 11 

## 12 

(^13 14 15 16) 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 28 27 menstruation (period) On which days of the menstrual cycle is a woman most likely to become pregnant? **A** days 1 4 **B** days 7 10 **C** days 13 16 **D** days 20 23 


© UCLES 2015 0610/12/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

**26** The diagram shows a vertical section through a flower. 

## Y 

## X 

 What are X and Y? 

## X Y 

 A anther stigma 

 B anther style 

 C stamen stigma 

 D stamen style 

**27** The graph shows the height of a child, from birth to the age of 10. 

## 0 2 4 6 8 10 

## 140 

## 120 

## 100 

## 80 

## 60 

## 40 

## 20 

## 0 

 age / years 

 height / cm 

 What was the approximate height of the child at 7 years of age? 

 A 106 cm B 116 cm C 122 cm D 130 cm 


© UCLES 2015 0610/12/O/N/15 

**28** Four samples of seeds germinated in different conditions of temperature and light, as shown in the table. 

 sample temperature / °C light 

 1 20 absent 

 2 20 present 

 3 5 absent 

 4 5 present 

 A typical seedling from each sample was removed after seven days. 

 Which seedling was from sample 2? 

 green 

 green 

 yellow 

 yellow 

## A B C D 

**29** What results from meiosis of a diploid cell? 

 A genetically different diploid cells 

 B genetically different haploid cells 

 C genetically identical diploid cells 

 D genetically identical haploid cells 

**30** What will be the genotypes of the offspring resulting from a genetic cross between two individuals, one of which is homozygous dominant, (TT), and the other heterozygous? 

 A all Tt 

 B 50% TT, 50% tt 

 C 50% TT, 50%Tt 

 D 25%TT, 50% Tt, 25% tt 


 © UCLES 2015 0610/12/O/N/15 [Turn over 

 31 Which pathway is taken by energy from the Sun? 

 A chemical energy in carbohydrates 

 stored in plants trapped by chlorophyll 

## B 

 chemical energy in carbohydrates 

 stored in plants trapped by chlorophyll 

## C 

 chemical energy in carbohydrates 

 trapped by stored in plants chlorophyll 

## D 

 chemical energy in carbohydrates 

 stored in plants 

 trapped by chlorophyll 

 32 The diagram shows a food chain. 

 insect-eating lettuce greenflies ladybirds birds hawks 

 If the hawks are removed from this food chain, what is likely to happen to the numbers of the other organisms in this chain? 

 greenflies ladybirds insect-eating birds 

 A decrease increase decrease 

 B decrease increase increase 

 C increase decrease decrease 

 D increase decrease increase 

**33** The diagram shows a food web including a producer, consumers and a decomposer. 

 Which organism is the decomposer? 

 organism D 

 organism B 

 organism C 

 organism A 


© UCLES 2015 0610/12/O/N/15 

**34** Which organisms remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere? 

 A carnivores 

 B decomposers 

 C herbivores 

 D producers 

**35** Which process is **not** part of the carbon cycle? 

 A combustion 

 B photosynthesis 

 C respiration 

 D transpiration 

**36** The diagram shows a simple water cycle. 

 tree 

 soil 

 cloud 

 rain 

 What is responsible for water loss from the tree? 

 A evaporation 

 B photosynthesis 

 C respiration 

 D translocation 


© UCLES 2015 0610/12/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

**37** The graphs show the number of carnivores in a habitat over a period of time. At time X the herbivores in their food chain are removed from the habitat. 

 Which graph shows the effect of this on the number of carnivores? 

 X time X time 

 X time X time 

 number of carnivores 

 number of carnivores 

 number of carnivores 

 number of carnivores 

## A B 

## C D 

**38** What is a reason for conserving plant species? 

 A to absorb oxygen from the air 

 B to decrease rainfall 

 C to obtain drugs for medicinal use 

 D to release carbon dioxide into the air 

**39** What is **reduced** after deforestation? 

 A force of rain hitting the ground 

 B rainwater run-off 

 C soil erosion 

 D soil fertility 


© UCLES 2015 0610/12/O/N/15 

**40** The diagram shows four positions on a river where water samples were taken. 

## W 

## X 

## Y Z 

 direction of flow 

 untreated sewage outlet 

 Which graph shows oxygen concentrations in the river? 

## W X 

## B 

## Y Z 

 oxygen concentration 

## W X 

## A 

## Y Z 

 oxygen concentration 

## W X 

## D 

## Y Z 

 oxygen concentration 

## W X 

## C 

## Y Z 

 oxygen concentration 

 position 

 position position 

 position 


© UCLES 2015 0610/12/O/N/15 

## BLANK PAGE 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2015 0610/12/O/N/15 

## BLANK PAGE 


