 This document consists of 7 printed pages and 1 blank page. 

 DC (NH/FD) 102798/3 © UCLES 2015 [Turn over 

* 7 8 0 1 0 7 0 1 3 5 * 

## BIOLOGY 0610/51 

 Paper 5 Practical Test October/November 2015 CONFIDENTIAL INSTRUCTIONS 

 Great care should be taken to ensure that any confidential information given does not reach the candidates either directly or indirectly. 

 If you have any problems or queries regarding these Instructions, please contact CIE by e-mail info@cie.org.uk by phone +44 1223 553554 by fax +44 1223 553558 stating the Centre number, the nature of the query and the syllabus number quoted above. 

 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 


© UCLES 2015 0610/51/CI/O/N/15 

## READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

These Instructions give details of the apparatus required by each candidate for each experiment in this paper. A summary of the questions that will be presented to the candidates is included, where appropriate, to allow the biology teacher to test the apparatus appropriately. **Testing must be done out of sight of all candidates.** 

**No access to the question paper is permitted in advance of the examination.** 

Centres are reminded that candidates are expected to follow the instructions on the question paper and record all their results. They will not be penalised if these results are not what they expect. 

The Supervisor should make sure that the Supervisor’s Report is fully completed and a copy is enclosed with each packet of scripts. 

It is assumed that the ordinary apparatus of a science laboratory will be available, including a supply of purified water (distilled or deionised). 

If arrangements are made for different sessions for different groups of candidates, care must be taken to ensure that the different groups of candidates are effectively isolated so that **no information passes between them**. 

**All specimens should carry only the code letters and numbers as indicated and their identity should not be revealed to the candidates.** 

Supervisors should ensure that all specimens have the correct identity attached to the specimen and that these are **not** removed during the examination. 

If a candidate breaks any of the apparatus, or loses any of the material supplied, the matter should be rectified and a note made in the Supervisor’s Report. 

Supervisors are advised to remind candidates that **all** substances in the examination should be treated with caution. Pipette fillers and safety goggles should be used where necessary. 

In accordance with the COSHH (Control of Substances Hazardous to Health) Regulations, operative in the UK, a hazard appraisal of the examination has been carried out. 

The following codes are used where relevant: 

**C** = corrosive substance **F** = highly flammable substance 

**H** = harmful or irritating substance **O** = oxidising substance 

**N** = harmful to the environment **T** = toxic substance 

Centres are reminded that they are **not** permitted to open the question paper envelopes before the examination. 

If there are any difficulties with any aspect of setting up this practical examination that the Centre is not able to resolve, it is essential for Centres to contact the Product Manager as soon as possible by **e-mail** to info@cie.org.uk, by **fax** to +44 1223 553558 or by **phone** to +44 1223 553554. 


© UCLES 2015 0610/51/CI/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

**Question 1** 

Each candidate should be provided with: 

 (i) eye protection 

 (ii) iodine in potassium iodide solution, as used for food testing, in the usual dispensing bottle (with dropping pipette), labelled iodine solution 

 (iii) three glass rods 

 (iv) paper towels 

 (v) one small beaker of water, labelled water 

 (vi) two white tiles (minimum size 10 cm × 10 cm) 

 (vii) means of labelling tiles and test-tubes 

 (viii) two large test-tubes, to be provided in a beaker or test-tube rack to support the test-tubes in an upright position 

 (ix) one syringe, to measure a volume of 5 cm 3 

 (x) 20 cm^3 of a starch and sodium chloride solution mixture, in a beaker labelled starch solution 

 (xi) one test-tube, containing 2 cm 3 of 1% amylase solution and 2 cm 3 of pH5 buffer solution, labelled A5 

 (xii) one test-tube, containing 2 cm 3 of 1% amylase solution and 2 cm 3 of pH7 buffer solution, labelled A7 

 (xiii) view of a clock or timer that allows candidates to time minute intervals accurately. 

**Preparation Instructions** 

_1% amylase solution_ 

To prepare 1% amylase solution, dissolve 1g of powdered diastase in 100 cm^3 distilled or deionised water (note that diastase is recommended as other sources of amylase may not work in the context of this examination). 

_starch and sodium chloride solution mixture_ 

To prepare 1% starch solution, use a soluble starch (such as potato). Mix 1g of dried starch with cold water to form a paste and then add boiling water up to a total volume of 100 cm^3 , stirring until the solution becomes clear. Allow the solution to cool. 

To prepare 1% sodium chloride solution, dissolve 1g of sodium chloride in 100 cm^3 of cold water. 

Add 5 cm^3 of the 1% sodium chloride solution to 100 cm^3 of the 1% starch solution. This is sufficient for five candidates and can be made up to 3 days before the examination. 


© UCLES 2015 0610/51/CI/O/N/15 

_buffer solutions_ 

pH5 and pH7 buffers can be purchased in tablet form, with full instructions for use. Alternatively, they can be freshly made up using 0.1 mol dm –3^ citric acid solution and 0.2 mol dm–3^ di-sodium hydrogen phosphate solution in the proportions shown in Table 1. 

 Table 1 

 pH 

 to prepare 100 cm 3 citric acid-phosphate buffer: 

 0.2 mol dm –3^ di-sodium hydrogen phosphate / cm^3 0.1 mol dm –3^ citric acid / cm 3 

 5 52 48 

 7 82 18 

To prepare 0.2 mol dm –3^ di-sodium hydrogen phosphate solution, dissolve 28.4 g of di-sodium hydrogen phosphate in 1 dm 3 of distilled or deionised water. 

To prepare 0.1 mol dm–3^ citric acid solution, dissolve 19.21 g of sodium citrate in 1 dm^3 of distilled or deionised water. 

**Before the examination** , the Supervisor must trial part of this investigation. 

It is necessary to test the digestion of the starch solution by the amylase. Prepare the contents of test-tube **A5** as described in **(xi)**. Use iodine solution to determine when the end point of the reaction has been reached for test-tube **A5**. This should take approximately eight minutes. If the digestion takes place a lot quicker, the amylase solution should be diluted and/or the sodium chloride solution should be omitted. If the digestion takes much longer than eight minutes, dilute the starch solution. In both instances, re-trial and record any final changes in the Supervisor’s Report. 


© UCLES 2015 0610/51/CI/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

**Question 2** 

Each candidate should be provided with: 

 (i) one 5 cm length of ripe maize cob 

 (ii) one hand lens (at least ×6 magnification) 

 (iii) one ruler (with mm scale) 

 measure this length 

 outer surface 

 point of attachment to cob 

 Fig. 1 

**Before the examination** , the Supervisor should remove and measure the length of a sample of maize grains (as shown in Fig. 1) and record the range of lengths in the space provided in the Supervisor’s Report. 

 The Supervisor ( not the Invigilator) should carry out the practical aspects of Question 1 and record their results in the space provided in the Supervisor’s Report. This must be done during the examination, using the same apparatus and reagents as the candidates but out of sight of the candidates. 


© UCLES 2015 0610/51/CI/O/N/15 

## BLANK PAGE 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 


© UCLES 2015 0610/51/CI/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

 This form should be completed and returned to CIE with the scripts. 

 REPORT ON PRACTICAL BIOLOGY 

_The Supervisor should provide the following information._ 

**1** Was any difficulty experienced in providing the necessary materials? If so, give brief details. 

 .......................................................................................................................................................... 

 .......................................................................................................................................................... 

 .......................................................................................................................................................... 

**2** Give details of any difficulties experienced by particular candidates, giving names and candidate numbers. Reference should be made to: 

 (a) difficulties with specimens or materials; 

 ................................................................................................................................................... 

 (b) accidents to apparatus or materials; 

 ................................................................................................................................................... 

 (c) assistance provided in case of colour-blindness; 

 ................................................................................................................................................... 

 (d) any other information that is likely to assist the Examiner, especially if this cannot be discovered from the scripts. 

 ................................................................................................................................................... 

 Other cases of individual hardship, e.g. illness or disability, should be reported directly to CIE on the normal ‘Special Consideration Form’ as detailed in the Handbook for Centres. 

**3** During the examination, the Supervisor should, **out of sight of the candidates,** carry out the practical aspects of **Question 1** , using the same apparatus and reagents as the candidates. Results should be recorded in the space on page **8** ( **not** on a spare question paper). 

 The Invigilator should not carry out Question 1. 


© UCLES 2015 0610/51/CI/O/N/15 

 Range of lengths of typical maize grains ......................................................................................... 

**4** A plan of work benches, giving details of the candidate numbers of the places occupied by the candidate for each session, must be enclosed with the scripts. 

 Declaration (to be signed by the Principal or the Examinations Officer) 

 The preparation of this practical has been carried out so as to maintain fully the security of the examination. 

 Signed ............................................................................ 

 Name (in block capitals) ............................................................................ 

 Centre number ............................................................................ 

 Centre name ................................................................................................................................... 

 If scripts are required to be dispatched in more than one packet, it is essential that a copy of the Supervisor’s Report and the appropriate seating plan(s) are inside each packet. 


