 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 18 printed pages and 2 blank pages. IB18 03_0625_12/3RP© UCLES 2018 [Turn over 

# *8208222047 

# * 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## PHYSICS 0625/12 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) February/March 2018 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer SheetSoft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB recommended) READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid.Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you.DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. There areanswers A forty , B , C questions on this paper. Answerand D. all questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet.Electronic calculators may be used. Take the weight of 1.0 kg to be 10 N (acceleration of free fall = 10 m / s^2 ). 


© UCLES 2018 0625/12/F/M/18 

**1** A student is asked to find the volume of a small irregularly-shaped piece of rock. He has the following apparatus available. 100 90 80 70 60 50 40 

(^3020) (^100102030405060708090 100) measuring cylinder containing water balance rule Which apparatus must the student use to find the volume of the small piece of rock? **A** balance and rule **B** rule only **C** balance and measuring cylinder **D** measuring cylinder only **2** The speed-time graph represents the motion of a car travelling along a straight level road. (^00) speed time Which statement describes the motion of the car? **A** It accelerates and reaches a constant speed. **B** It accelerates and then stops moving. **C** It decelerates and then reaches a constant speed. **D** It decelerates and then stops moving. 


© UCLES 2018 0625/12/F/M/18 **[Turn over** 

**3** An athlete runs 300 metres up a hill at a steady speed of 3.0 m / s. She then immediately runs the same distance down the hill at a steady speed of 6.0 m / s. What is her average speed for the 600 metre run? **A** 2.0 m / s **B** 3.0 m / s **C** 4.0 m / s **D** 4.5 m / s 

**4** Which statement is correct? **A** Mass is a gravitational force but weight is not a gravitational force. **B** Mass is not a gravitational force and weight is not a gravitational force. **C** The unit of mass is the kilogram and the unit of weight is the newton. **D** The unit of mass is the newton and the unit of weight is the kilogram. 

**5** The diagram shows a bird in flight. The bird is flying in a horizontal direction to the right. In which direction does air resistance act on the bird? **A** 

## D 

## C 

## B 


© UCLES 2018 0625/12/F/M/18 

**6** A measuring cylinder contains 30 cm^3 of a liquid. 

 10 

 20 

 30 

 40 

 50 

 cm^3 

 balance 

 Some more of the liquid is added until the liquid level reaches the 50 cm^3 mark. The reading on the balance increases by 30 g. What is the density of the liquid? A 0.60 g / cm^3 B 0.67 g / cm^3 C 1.5 g / cm^3 D 1.7 g / cm^3 

**7** A car is travelling along a straight horizontal road. The speed-time graph is shown. In which labelled part of the journey is the resultant force on the car zero? 

(^00) speed time 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 

**8** The diagram shows a uniform metre rule balanced at its mid-point. 0 20 50 70 100 

## W 6.0 N 

 What is the weight W placed at the 20 cm mark? A 0.25 N B 4.0 N C 9.0 N D 21 N 


© UCLES 2018 0625/12/F/M/18 **[Turn over** 

**9** A wooden plank rests in equilibrium on two rocks on opposite sides of a narrow stream. Three forces _P_ , _Q_ and _R_ act on the plank. 

## Q 

## P R 

 plank 

 How are the sizes of the forces related? A P + Q = R B P + R = Q C P = Q = R D P = Q + R 

**10** A ball is at rest at the top of a hill. It rolls down the hill. At the bottom of the hill the ball hits a wall and stops. Which energy changes occur? **A** gravitational potential energy → internal energy → kinetic energy **B** gravitational potential energy → kinetic energy → internal energy **C** kinetic energy → gravitational potential energy → internal energy **D** kinetic energy → internal energy → gravitational potential energy 


© UCLES 2018 0625/12/F/M/18 

**11** A man pulls a truck a distance of 20 m, as shown in the three diagrams. 

 10 m 

## 1 2 

 10 m 

 10 m 

 10 m 

 10 m 

 10 m 

## 3 

 Which statement concerning the work done against gravity is correct? A Most work is done in 1. B No work is done in 3. C The work done in all three is equal. D The work done in 1 and 2 is equal. 

**12** Which source of energy is used in a nuclear power station to generate electrical energy? **A** different types of atom regrouping **B** heavy nuclei splitting **C** radioactive isotopes decaying **D** radioactive atoms emitting β-particles 

**13** Two beakers are filled to the same depth, one with water and one with oil. The density of water is 1000 kg / m^3 and the density of oil is 920 kg / m^3. In which position is the pressure the greatest? 

 A 

## B 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 

water (^) oil 


© UCLES 2018 0625/12/F/M/18 **[Turn over** 

**14** A water manometer is connected to a gas supply. 

 water 

 supplygas 

## P 

## Q 

 There is a gas leak and the pressure of the gas supply falls. What happens to the water level at P and what happens to the water level at Q? water level at P water level at Q A falls falls B falls rises C rises falls D rises rises 


© UCLES 2018 0625/12/F/M/18 

**15** A cylinder with a tap contains a fixed mass of gas X. The gas is contained by a piston which canmove freely towards or away from the tap. 

 gas X tap closed piston cylinder 

 atmosphere 

 When the tap is opened, the piston moves slightly to the right, towards the tap. 

gas X (^) tap open atmosphere What can be deduced about the pressure of gas X? before opening tap after opening tap **A** less than atmospheric pressure more than atmospheric pressure **B** same as atmospheric pressure more than atmospheric pressure **C** more than atmospheric pressure less than atmospheric pressure **D** more than atmospheric pressure same as atmospheric pressure **16** Which quantity does **not** change when there is an increase in temperature? **A** the density of a steel block **B** the diameter of the hole in a metal nut **C** the length of an iron rod **D** the mass of a metal coin **17** A thermometer has a low thermal capacity. Why is this an advantage? **A** The thermometer does not absorb much thermal energy to raise its own temperature. **B** The thermometer does not conduct much thermal energy to the surroundings. **C** The thermometer does not melt when it gets hot. **D** The thermometer does not radiate much thermal energy to the surroundings. 


© UCLES 2018 0625/12/F/M/18 **[Turn over** 

**18** In an experiment, a thermometer is placed in a test-tube of hot liquid. The temperature reading ofthe liquid is recorded every half minute. The table shows the results. 

time / minutes 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 5.0 5.5 6.0 6.5 7.0 7.5 temperature / °C 73 65 59 55 55 55 51 48 45 42 40 38 36 35 34 33 

 What is the melting point of the substance? A 0 °C B 33 °C C 55 °C D 73 °C 

**19** A teacher demonstrates an experiment to a class. A boiling tube is filled with water and some ice cubes are trapped at the bottom of the tube. The teacher then heats the boiling tube in theposition shown until the water at the top boils. 

 ice 

 water 

 metal mesh 

 heat 

 The ice does not melt. What does this demonstrate? A Water is a good conductor of thermal energy. B Water is a good convector of thermal energy. C Water is a poor conductor of thermal energy. D Water is a poor convector of thermal energy. 


© UCLES 2018 0625/12/F/M/18 

**20** A hot metal plate is placed near to a cold metal plate. Infra-red radiation transfers thermal energybetween the two plates. 

 cold plate 

 hot plate 

 Which choice of colour causes the temperature of the cold plate to increase most slowly? hot plate cold plate A matt black matt black B matt black shiny white C shiny white matt black D shiny white shiny white 

**21** Which row shows an example of a transverse wave and an example of a longitudinal wave? 

 transverse longitudinal A light radio B radio sound C sound water D water light 

**22** An object is placed before a plane mirror as shown. A student views the image of the object in the mirror from point P. Where does she see the image? 

 object 

 P 

## B C 

## A 

## D 

 mirror 


© UCLES 2018 0625/12/F/M/18 **[Turn over** 

**23** Light passes through a prism as shown. The light changes direction and produces a spectrum ofcolours. 

 white light spectrum of colours Which term is used to describe the production of the spectrum of colours? A diffraction B dispersion C refraction D total internal reflection 

**24** Which type of waves are produced by a television remote controller? **A** infra-red waves **B** radio waves **C** ultraviolet waves **D** visible light 

**25** Both the amplitude and the frequency of a sound wave decrease. What happens to the sound heard? **A** The sound is louder and has a higher pitch. **B** The sound is louder and has a lower pitch. **C** The sound is quieter and has a higher pitch. **D** The sound is quieter and has a lower pitch. 

**26** An electromagnet is used to remove a splinter from an eye. What material is the splinter made from? **A** aluminium **B** glass **C** iron **D** wood 


© UCLES 2018 0625/12/F/M/18 

**27** Which diagram shows the magnetic field around a bar magnet? **A B** 

## C D 

## N S N S 

## N S N S 

**28** A metal conductor is connected to a battery. Which statement describes the current in the metal conductor? **A** It is a flow of electrons from the negative to the positive terminal. **B** It is a flow of electrons from the positive to the negative terminal. **C** It is a flow of protons from the negative to the positive terminal. **D** It is a flow of protons from the positive to the negative terminal. 


© UCLES 2018 0625/12/F/M/18 **[Turn over** 

**29** A student sets up the circuit shown to measure three quantities. 1 the current in the circuit 2 the electromotive force (e.m.f.) of the cell 3 the potential difference across the lamp 

 How many ammeters and how many voltmeters are needed? ammeters voltmeters A 0 3 B 1 2 C 2 1 D 3 0 

**30** The current in a car headlamp is 3.0 A when connected to a 12 V battery. What is the resistance of the lamp when it is lit? **A** 0.25 Ω **B** 4.0 Ω **C** 15 Ω **D** 36 Ω 


© UCLES 2018 0625/12/F/M/18 

**31** The diagram shows a circuit containing a cell, an ammeter, a lamp and a variable resistor. 

## A 

 The resistance of the variable resistor is increased. What happens to the ammeter reading and what happens to the brightness of the lamp? ammeter reading lamp brightness A decreases decreases B decreases increases C increases decreases D increases increases 

**32** Diagram 1 shows two identical lamps connected in series with a cell. Diagram 2 shows the sametwo lamps connected in parallel with an identical cell. 

 diagram 1 diagram 2 Which statement is correct? A The cell in diagram 1 can supply current to the lamps for longer than the cell in diagram 2. B The current in the cell in diagram 1 is greater than the current in the cell in diagram 2. C The lamps in diagram 1 are brighter than the lamps in diagram 2. D The voltage across each lamp in diagram 1 is greater than the voltage in diagram 2. 


© UCLES 2018 0625/12/F/M/18 **[Turn over** 

**33** A circuit contains four ammeters and three resistors with different values. Which ammeter shows the largest reading? 

## A 

## A 

## A 

## A 

## 20 Ω 

## 10 Ω 

## 30 Ω 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 

**34** The diagram shows the arrangement of the coil, armature and contacts of a relay. Which diagram shows this arrangement when there is no current in the coil? 

 pivot 

## A 

 contacts 

 coil 

## B 

## C D 

 armature 


© UCLES 2018 0625/12/F/M/18 

**35** The diagram represents a magnetic field. 

 What causes this field? A a bar magnet B a solenoid carrying a current C a straight wire carrying a current D two north poles close together 

**36** The diagram shows a simple d.c. electric motor which is rotating. 

magnet (^) S N magnet coil Which change makes the motor rotate more quickly? **A** increasing the number of turns on the coil **B** removing the magnets **C** reversing the battery **D** reversing the polarity of the magnets 


© UCLES 2018 0625/12/F/M/18 **[Turn over** 

**37** The notation for an isotope of sodium is 2311 Na. 

 Which row gives the composition of a neutral atom of this isotope of sodium? number of protons 

 number of neutrons 

 number of electrons A 11 12 11 B 11 12 12 C 11 23 11 D 12 11 12 

**38** Which diagram represents a nucleus of 31 H? 

 n 

 np 

## A 

 p n 

 p 

## B 

 n n 

 n p 

 p p p 

 p n 

 n 

**C D** (^) key = a neutron = a proton **39** When measuring the emissions from a radioactive rock brought into the laboratory, a teacher mentions that background radiation must be taken into account. What is this background radiation? **A** infra-red radiation from warm objects in the laboratory **B** infra-red radiation from the Sun **C** ionising radiation from the radioactive rock brought into the laboratory **D** ionising radiation in the laboratory when the radioactive rock is not present 


© UCLES 2018 0625/12/F/M/18 

**40** The graph shows the percentage of a radioactive isotope that remains as time passes. 100 

 75 

 50 

 25 

(^0 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40) time / minutes percentage of isotope remaining / % A student measures the initial rate of emission of this isotope as 40 000 emissions per second. How long does it take for the rate of emission to fall to 5000 emissions per second? **A** 5 minutes **B** 15 minutes **C** 20 minutes **D** 40 minutes 


## BLANK PAGE 

© UCLES 2018 0625/12/F/M/18 


## BLANK PAGE 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeInternational Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge LocalExaminations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2018 0625/12/F/M/18 


