 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 18 printed pages and 2 blank pages. 

 IB16 03_0610_12/3RP © UCLES 2016 [Turn over 

# *6346877844* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## BIOLOGY 0610/12 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) February/March 2016 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A, B, C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2016 0610/12/F/M/16 

1 The equation shows a chemical reaction that occurs in living organisms. 

 glucose + oxygen → carbon dioxide + water 

 Which of these characteristics of living organisms is this equation associated with? 

 respiration nutrition 

 A ✓ ✓ 

 B ✓  

 C  ✓ 

 D   

2 What is a correct way of naming an organism using the binomial system? 

 A Common buttercup 

 B ranunculus acris 

 C Ranunculus acris 

 D Ranunculus sp. 


© UCLES 2016 0610/12/F/M/16 [Turn over 

3 The diagram shows a leaf. 

 Use the key to identify the plant to which the leaf belongs. 

 leaf in one piece 

 leaf edge smooth 

 Fagus sylvatica 

 leaf edge jagged 

 Ulmus minor 

 leaf in more than one piece 

 leaf edge smooth 

 Fraxinus americana 

 leaf edge jagged 

 Sorbus aucuparia 

 leaves 

## A B C D 

4 A palisade cell and a nerve cell are observed under a light microscope. 

 Only the palisade cell has a 

 A cell membrane. 

 B cytoplasm. 

 C nucleus. 

 D vacuole. 


© UCLES 2016 0610/12/F/M/16 

5 The diagram shows a palisade mesophyll cell from a green leaf. 

## W 

## X 

## Y 

## Z 

 In which labelled part does photosynthesis occur and where is starch stored? 

 photosynthesis occurs 

 starch is stored 

 A X W 

 B X Z 

 C Y X 

 D Y Y 

6 Which row describes a root hair cell? 

 allows water to pass into the plant 

 increases the surface area of the root 

 loses water by transpiration 

 A ✓ ✓ ✓ 

 B ✓ ✓ ✗ 

 C ✓ ✗ ✓ 

 D ✗ ✓ ✓ 


© UCLES 2016 0610/12/F/M/16 [Turn over 

7 The diagram shows a test-tube containing clear jelly. A drop of blue ink is injected into the middle of the jelly. 

 clear jelly 

 drop of blue ink 

 The blue colour of the ink spreads throughout the jelly. 

 By which process does the blue ink spread through the jelly? 

 A active transport 

 B catalysis 

 C diffusion 

 D osmosis 

8 Which diagram shows the changes in appearance of a plant cell when it remains in a concentrated sugar solution for thirty minutes? 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 


© UCLES 2016 0610/12/F/M/16 

9 The diagram shows a large food molecule changing into smaller molecules. 

 process X 

 What is process X? 

 A absorption 

 B chewing 

 C digestion 

 D secretion 

10 The table shows the conditions in four test-tubes containing equal amounts of starch and salivary amylase. 

 In which test-tube is the starch broken down fastest? 

 pH 

 temperature / °C 

 A 2 27 

 B 2 37 

 C 7 27 

 D 7 37 

11 Plants manufacture their own supplies of carbohydrate. 

 What are the raw materials and the waste product of this process? 

 raw materials waste product 

 A carbon dioxide and chlorophyll oxygen 

 B carbon dioxide and water oxygen 

 C oxygen and chlorophyll carbon dioxide 

 D oxygen and water carbon dioxide 


© UCLES 2016 0610/12/F/M/16 [Turn over 

12 A plant with variegated leaves has the starch removed from its leaves by placing it in a dark cupboard for 48 hours. 

 Black paper is then fixed on one leaf as shown and the plant is exposed to light. 

 After 24 hours, which part of the leaf contains starch? 

 green region white region 

 black paper on both sides of leaf 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 

13 The diagram shows part of the alimentary canal and associated organs. 

## U 

## T 

## V 

## W 

 Which structures secrete enzymes that digest proteins? 

 A T and U B U and V C V and W D W and T 


© UCLES 2016 0610/12/F/M/16 

14 The graph shows pH changes in the mouth after eating. 

## 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 

## 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 

 time after eating / minutes 

 pH 

 Why is it a good idea to brush teeth after eating? 

 A Acidic conditions help bacteria to grow. 

 B Acids dissolve tooth enamel. 

 C Alkaline conditions help bacteria to grow. 

 D Alkalis dissolve tooth enamel. 

15 The diagram shows part of a protein molecule. 

## X 

 What does X represent? 

 A amino acid 

 B fatty acid 

 C glycerol 

 D sugar 

16 By which process is water lost from a leaf? 

 A active transport 

 B diffusion 

 C osmosis 

 D photosynthesis 


© UCLES 2016 0610/12/F/M/16 [Turn over 

17 The lower end of a plant stem is placed in water coloured with red dye. After three hours, the stem is cut as shown in the diagram. 

 Which labelled region is stained red? 

## D 

## A 

## B 

## C 

18 The diagram shows a section through the heart. 

 Which part pumps blood to the aorta? 

## B 

## D C 

## A 


© UCLES 2016 0610/12/F/M/16 

19 The diagram shows a section through a blood vessel in the leg. 

## P 

## Q 

 Which type of blood vessel is shown, and in which direction does the blood flow? 

 type of vessel 

 direction of flow 

 A artery P to Q 

 B artery Q to P 

 C vein P to Q 

 D vein Q to P 

20 The table shows the approximate composition of air breathed out by a mammal. 

 gas air breathed out / % 

 nitrogen 80 

 oxygen 16 

 carbon dioxide 4 

 Where does the nitrogen in the air breathed out come from? 

 A It is a product of proteins broken down in the mammal. 

 B It is a product of respiration. 

 C It is exchanged for oxygen which is taken into the blood. 

 D It is in the air that was breathed in. 

21 What is produced by yeast during anaerobic respiration? 

 A carbon dioxide and water 

 B ethanol and carbon dioxide 

 C ethanol and water 

 D lactic acid 


© UCLES 2016 0610/12/F/M/16 [Turn over 

22 What helps oxygen to be absorbed rapidly into the blood in the lungs? 

 A Air breathed in has less oxygen than air breathed out. 

 B Alveoli have thick walls and a large surface area. 

 C Alveoli have thin walls and a large surface area. 

 D The concentration of oxygen in the blood is higher than in the alveoli. 

23 The diagram shows an experiment to investigate gas exchange in a leaf. 

 leaf 

 substance to absorb carbon dioxide 

 black cover ink drop 

 In which direction does the ink drop move and for what reason? 

 direction reason 

 A to the left photosynthesis 

 B to the left respiration 

 C to the right photosynthesis 

 D to the right respiration 

24 Where is urea formed? 

 A kidneys 

 B liver 

 C muscles 

 D small intestine 


© UCLES 2016 0610/12/F/M/16 

25 The diagram shows the structures involved in a reflex action. 

 hot pan 

## R 

## S 

## Q 

## P 

 What is the sequence in which impulses pass through these structures? 

 A P → S → R → Q 

 B Q → R → S → P 

 C Q → P → R → S 

 D S → P → Q → R 

26 Which part of the human eye is sensitive to light? 

 A iris 

 B lens 

 C optic nerve 

 D retina 


© UCLES 2016 0610/12/F/M/16 [Turn over 

27 The diagram shows an experiment to investigate the response of a plant stem to gravity. 

 in dark 

 result after two days in dark 

 What is a suitable control for this experiment? 

 in dark 

 in dark 

## A B 

 light 

 light 

 rotated slowly 

## C D 

28 Possible effects of drug abuse include 

 1 addiction, 2 reduced self-control, 

 3 severe withdrawal symptoms. 

 Which effects may occur as a result of drinking too much alcohol? 

 A 1, 2 and 3 B 1 and 2 only C 1 only D 2 and 3 only 

29 What must always be available to allow seeds to germinate? 

 A carbon dioxide 

 B light 

 C mineral salts 

 D water 


© UCLES 2016 0610/12/F/M/16 

30 The diagram shows a flower. 

 In which structure do seeds develop? 

## C 

## B 

## A 

## D 

31 The graph shows the number of pregnancies in four groups of 100 women. Each group used a different method of contraception. 

 20 

## 10 

## 0 

 contraceptive pill 

 intra-uterine device (IUD) 

 diaphragm monitoring body temperature 

 number of pregnancies 

 The method of contraception which is the least effective is 

 A barrier. 

 B chemical. 

 C natural. 

 D surgical. 

32 The following statements are about some hormones in the human body. 

 V causes changes in the ovaries during the menstrual cycle 

 W promotes the development of stronger muscles 

 X causes the voice to deepen at puberty 

 Y produced by the pancreas 

 Which statements are correct for testosterone? 

 A V and W B V and Y C W and X D X and Y 


© UCLES 2016 0610/12/F/M/16 [Turn over 

33 Which substance is coded for by a length of DNA? 

 A fat 

 B fatty acid 

 C glycerol 

 D lipase 

34 What are alleles? 

 A a pair of chromosomes 

 B different versions of the same gene 

 C the total number of genes on one chromosome 

 D two genes side by side on the same chromosome 

35 A pure-breeding plant with smooth stems was crossed with a heterozygous plant with hairy stems. 

 What will be the ratio of hairy : smooth stems in the resulting plants? 

 A 1 hairy : 1 smooth 

 B 1 hairy : 3 smooth 

 C 3 hairy : 1 smooth 

 D all hairy 

36 Which processes are part of the carbon cycle? 

 decomposition evaporation ingestion 

 A ✓ ✓  

 B ✓  ✓ 

 C  ✓  

 D   ✓ 


© UCLES 2016 0610/12/F/M/16 

37 The diagram shows organisms feeding on a dead rat and one of the organisms which, in turn, feeds on them. 

 What is needed to complete the food chain? 

 A carnivore 

 B consumer 

 C predator 

 D producer 


© UCLES 2016 0610/12/F/M/16 [Turn over 

38 The diagram shows a food web. 

 tiny floating plants 

 tiny floating animals 

 mussels 

 sea lettuce 

 lugworms limpets 

 prawns crabs 

 lobsters whelks 

 seagulls 

 Which organisms feed on the greatest variety of other organisms, as shown in this food web? 

 A crabs 

 B limpets 

 C lobsters 

 D mussels 


© UCLES 2016 0610/12/F/M/16 

39 The diagram shows how sewage is treated. 

 screen settling water to river tank 

 second settling tank 

 aeration tank 

 air out 

 air in 

 sludge digester 

 sludge disposal 

 sludge 

 sludge 

 Why is air bubbled through the aeration tank? 

 A to encourage microorganisms to reproduce quickly 

 B to float the sludge 

 C to settle the sludge 

 D to stop microorganisms from reproducing too quickly 

40 Three human activities are listed. 

 1 burning fossil fuels 

 2 deforestation 

 3 overusing fertilisers 

 Which activities can cause the change shown in the graph? 

 concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere 

 time 

 A 1, 2 and 3 B 1 and 2 only C 1 only D 2 and 3 only 


© UCLES 2016 0610/12/F/M/16 

## BLANK PAGE 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2016 0610/12/F/M/16 

## BLANK PAGE 


