 This document consists of 16 printed pages. DC (ST/JG) 167382/4© UCLES 2019 [Turn over 

* 6 4 2 2 3 7 5 0 0 3 * **PHYSICS 0625/32** Paper 3 Theory (Core) **February/March 2019 1 hour 15 minutes** Candidates answer on the Question Paper. No Additional Materials are required. **READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST** Write your centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in.Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs.Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO **NOT** WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. AnswerElectronic calculators may be used. **all** questions. 

You may lose marks if you do not show your working or if you do not use appropriate units.Take the weight of 1.0 kg to be 10 N (acceleration of free fall = 10 m / s (^2) ). At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together.The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. **Cambridge Assessment International Education** Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education This syllabus is regulated for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 


 This document consists of 1 printed page. © UCLES 2019 

###  

###  

 Cambridge Cambridge International Assessment General Certificate of Secondary Education International Education 

#### PHYSICS 0625/32 

 Paper 3 Theory (Core) February/March 2019 1 hour 15 minutes 

## ERRATUM NOTICE 

## TO BE OPENED ON THE DAY OF THE EXAMINATION 

 FOR THE ATTENTION OF THE EXAMINATIONS OFFICER AND INVIGILATOR TO BE GIVEN TO CANDIDATES WITH THE QUESTION PAPER 

 Turn to page 9. Question 6(a) reads: Fig. 6.1 shows a cross-section of the inside of an electric oven. Question 6(a) should read: Fig. 6.1 is a diagram of the inside of an electric oven. The diagram shows a side view of theoven. 


**©UCLES 2019 0625/32/F/M/19** 

**1** Fig. 1.1 shows a set of masses made from the same material. 

 Fig. 1.1 (a) Identify the quantity that is the same for all the masses. Tick one box. density volume weight [1] (b) The largest mass is 2.5 kg. State the number of grams in 2.5 kg. 

 2.5 kg = ...................................................... g [1] (c) The three largest masses are 2.5 kg, 1.0 kg and 0.5 kg. Calculate the combined weight of these three masses. Include the unit. 

 weight = ......................................................... [4] [Total: 6] 


**©UCLES 2019 0625/32/F/M/19 [Turn over** 

**2** Fig. 2.1 shows students getting onto a school bus. 

 Fig. 2.1 (a) A student describes part of the journey. The bus accelerates from rest at a constant rate for 10 s. It reaches a maximum speed of 10 m / s. The bus maintains a constant speed of 10 m / s for 60 s. The bus then decelerates at a constant rate for 15 s, until it stops. On Fig. 2.2, draw the speed-time graph for this part of the journey made by the bus. 

(^00) 

#### 2 

#### 4 

#### 6 

#### 8 

#### 10 

#### 12 

#### 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 

 time / s 

 speed m / s 

 Fig. 2.2 [5] (b) On another part of the journey, the average speed of the bus is 7.5 m / s. Calculate the distance the bus travels in 150 s. 

 distance = ..................................................... m [3] [Total: 8] 


**©UCLES 2019 0625/32/F/M/19** 

**3** A load is attached to a spring, as shown in Fig. 3.1. Two arrows indicate the vertical forces acting on the load. The spring and the load are stationary. 

 load 

 spring 4.0 N 

 support 

 Fig. 3.1 (a) (i) State the name of the force acting vertically downwards. ..................................................................................................................................... [1] (ii) The vertical force that acts upwards is 4.0 N. State the value of the force acting vertically downwards. force = ..................................................... N [1] (b) The load is pulled downwards and then released. The load moves up and down. Fig. 3.2 represents the vertical forces acting on the load at some time after it is released. 7.6 N 

#### 2.8 N 

 Fig. 3.2 Calculate the resultant force on the load and state its direction. 

 resultant force = ........................................................... N direction = ............................................................... [2] 


**©UCLES 2019 0625/32/F/M/19 [Turn over** 

 (c) (i) State the principle of conservation of energy. ........................................................................................................................................... ..................................................................................................................................... [1] (ii) Eventually the load stops moving up and down. Describe and explain why the load stops moving. Use your ideas about conservation of energy. ........................................................................................................................................... ........................................................................................................................................... ........................................................................................................................................... ..................................................................................................................................... [2] [Total: 7] 


**©UCLES 2019 0625/32/F/M/19** 

**4** Fig. 4.1 shows a truck lifting a heavy load. 

 truck 

 load 

 pivot Fig. 4.1 (a) (i) The truck is stationary. Identify the quantities that determine the work done as it lifts the load. Tick the box next to each correct quantity. distance force time [1] (ii) Draw a ring around the unit for work done from the list. joule newton pascal watt [1] (b) Identify the quantities that determine the power of the truck. Tick the box next to each correct quantity. energy transferred temperature time [1] 


**©UCLES 2019 0625/32/F/M/19 [Turn over** 

 (c) The truck has a pivot near the front wheel. Fig. 4.2 represents the pivot and the vertical forces acting on the truck. 1.5 m 1.0 m 

 30 000 N pivot load Fig. 4.2 The truck is in equilibrium. Calculate the load. 

 load = ..................................................... N [3] (d) Fig. 4.3 shows another truck lifting a pile of identical bricks. 

 pile of bricks 

 Fig. 4.3 (i) On Fig. 4.3, draw a cross to indicate the centre of mass of the pile of bricks. [1] (ii) The truck can tilt the pile of bricks backwards, as shown in Fig. 4.4. 

 Fig. 4.4 Explain how tilting the pile of bricks backwards makes the truck more stable. ........................................................................................................................................... ........................................................................................................................................... ........................................................................................................................................... ..................................................................................................................................... [1] [Total: 8] 


**©UCLES 2019 0625/32/F/M/19** 

**5** Fig. 5.1 shows part of a solar farm. The solar panels tilt and rotate. 

 solar panel 

 support Fig. 5.1 (a) The solar farm converts energy from a source into a different, useful form of energy. State the energy source and the useful form of energy. source ....................................................................................................................................... useful form of energy ................................................................................................................ [2] (b) Solar farms have advantages and disadvantages. (i) State two advantages of a solar farm. 

1. ....................................................................................................................................... 

2. .......................................................................................................................................     [2] **(ii)** State **one** disadvantage of a solar farm. ..................................................................................................................................... [1] **(c)** Suggest why it is useful that the panels can tilt and rotate. ................................................................................................................................................... ............................................................................................................................................. [1] [Total: 6] 


**©UCLES 2019 0625/32/F/M/19 [Turn over** 

**6 (a)** Fig. 6.1 shows a cross-section of the inside of an electric oven. metal casing 

 glass front heating element 

 Fig. 6.1 The heater is switched on. (i) On Fig. 6.1, draw two arrows to show how thermal energy moves throughout the oven by convection. [2] (ii) Explain how thermal energy moves throughout the oven by convection. Use your ideas about density and expansion. ........................................................................................................................................... ........................................................................................................................................... ........................................................................................................................................... ..................................................................................................................................... [3] (iii) Use a word from the box to complete the sentence. conduction expansion insulation radiation Thermal energy travels at the speed of light by .......................................................... [1] (b) The oven is in a kitchen that is fitted with a smoke detector. Warm, moving air can carry smoke particles. Suggest the best position for the smoke detector in the kitchen. ............................................................................................................................................. [1] [Total: 7] 


**©UCLES 2019 0625/32/F/M/19** 

**7** Light and sound both travel as waves. Draw a line from each statement to the correct term that describes it. One has been done for you. **statement term** change in direction of light whenentering a medium amplitude 

 very high frequency sounds 

 a glass prism producing a spectrum 

 light spreading after passing through a narrow gap 

 sound reflecting from a wall 

 seven colours of light 

 dispersion 

 diffraction 

 echo 

 longitudinal 

 refraction 

 spectrum 

 ultrasound [5] [Total: 5] 


**©UCLES 2019 0625/32/F/M/19 [Turn over** 

**8 (a)** Fig. 8.1 shows an incomplete diagram of the electromagnetic spectrum. 

 ultraviolet visible light higher frequency 

 radio waves longer wavelength Fig. 8.1 Complete Fig. 8.1 with the names of the missing types of radiation in the correct boxes. [4] (b) State one use for ultraviolet radiation. ............................................................................................................................................. [1] [Total: 5] 


**©UCLES 2019 0625/32/F/M/19** 

**9** Fig. 9.1 and Fig. 9.2 each show an electrical circuit. Each circuit has two lamps connected to an electrical supply. 

 X 

#### Y 

 .......................... circuit .......................... circuit Fig. 9.1 Fig. 9.2 (a) State the term used to describe each electrical circuit. Write the term under each circuit. [2] (b) State two disadvantages of the circuit in Fig. 9.2. 

1. ............................................................................................................................................... 

2. ...............................................................................................................................................     [2] **(c)** Redraw the circuit in Fig. 9.1 with switches that will turn lamps X and Y on and off independently of each other. 

#### [2] 


**©UCLES 2019 0625/32/F/M/19 [Turn over** 

 (d) Fig. 9.3 shows another circuit. 

#### K W 

#### J Z 

#### S 1 S 2 

 Fig. 9.3 The lamps can be turned on and off using two different switches S 1 and S 2. Complete the table stating when the lamps are on or off. The first one has been done for you. 

switch positions (^) lamps S 1 S 2 on or off K Z off K W J W J Z [3] [Total: 9] 


**©UCLES 2019 0625/32/F/M/19** 

**10** Fig. 10.1 shows the apparatus for an experiment on electrostatics. 

 aluminium clamp and stand iron nail 

 cotton thread plastic stirrup 

 polythene strip 

 Fig. 10.1 (a) Identify the pieces of equipment that are electrical conductors and those that are electrical insulators. Draw a line from each piece of equipment to the correct box. 

 aluminium clamp and stand 

 plastic stirrup 

 iron nail 

 cotton thread 

 conductor 

 insulator 

#### [1] 

 (b) State and explain how the polythene strip can be given a negative charge. ................................................................................................................................................... ................................................................................................................................................... ............................................................................................................................................. [2] (c) Describe how the apparatus in Fig. 10.1 could be used to demonstrate that the polythene strip has a negative charge. ................................................................................................................................................... ................................................................................................................................................... ............................................................................................................................................. [2] [Total: 5] 


**©UCLES 2019 0625/32/F/M/19 [Turn over** 

**11** Fig. 11.1 shows a relay. contacts 

 armature 

 pivot 

 primary circuit 

 to secondary circuit 

#### C 

 Fig. 11.1 (a) The statements describe the action of a relay. They are not in the correct order. P Current in the coil creates an electromagnet. Q Secondary circuit is completed. R Armature pivots, closing the contacts. S Part C attracts the armature. T The switch in the primary circuit is closed. Place the statements in the correct order. One has been done for you. S [3] (b) Fig. 11.1 includes the part labelled C, which is made from a metal. State the name of the metal and explain why this metal is used in the electromagnet. metal ......................................................................................................................................... explanation ............................................................................................................................... ................................................................................................................................................... [2] [Total: 5] 


**©UCLES 2019 0625/32/F/M/19** 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeAssessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University ofCambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. 

**12** Astatine-210 is a radioactive material. The nucleus of astatine can be represented by the symbol shown. 210 

# 85 At 

 (a) Complete the table to describe the nucleus of astatine-210. type of particle number of particles charge on particle neutron positive [4] (b) Astatine-210 has a half-life of 8 hours. (i) The count rate of a sample of astatine-210 is measured over 24 hours. On Fig. 12.1, sketch a line to show how the count rate changes over the 24 hours. 

 time / hours 

 count rate 

#### 0 8 16 24 

 Fig. 12.1 [2] (ii) The mass of a sample of astatine-210 is 0.500 kg. Calculate how long it takes for 0.375 kg of the sample to decay. 

 decay time = ............................................... hours [3] [Total: 9] 


