 This document consists of 16 printed pages. 

 DC (KN/CGW) 98325/2 © UCLES 2015 [Turn over 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

* 1 2 9 6 1 1 8 2 2 1 * 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/23 Paper 2 October/November 2015 2 hours Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all the questions. Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 


© UCLES 2015 0606/23/O/N/15 

 Mathematical Formulae 

### 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

 x 

 b b ac a 

 = 

 − 2 − 4 2 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( _n_ 

# 1 ) a 

_n_ –1 (^) _b_ + 

# ( 

 n 

# 2 ) a 

_n_ –2 (^) _b_ (^2) + … + 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) a 

_n_ – _r_ (^) _br_ (^) + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( _n_ 

# r )^ =^ 

 n! ( n – r )! r! 

### 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ 

 sin 2 A + cos^2 A = 1 

 sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A 

 cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC_ 

 a sin A =^ 

 b sin B =^ 

 c sin C 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

 ∆ = 1 2 

 bc sin A 


© UCLES 2015 0606/23/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

**1** Find the equation of the tangent to the curve _y_ = _x_^3 + 3 _x_^2 5 _x_ 7 at the point where _x_ = 2. [5] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/23/O/N/15 

**2** Find the values of _k_ for which the line _y_ = 2 _x_ + _k_ + 2 cuts the curve _y_ = 2 _x_^2 + ( _k_ + 2 ) _x_ + 8 in two distinct points. [6] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/23/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

**3 (a)** Given that _y x_ 

 x 2 2 

 3 = 

- 

 , find x 

 y d 

 d 

. [3] 

 (b) Given that y = x 4 x + 6 , show that 

### ( ) 

 x 

 y x 

 k x 4 6 

### 1 

 d 

 d = + 

### + 

 and state the value of k. [3] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/23/O/N/15 

**4** Solve the following simultaneous equations, giving your answers for both _x_ and _y_ in the form _a_ + _b_ 3 , where _a_ and _b_ are integers. 

 2 x + y = 9 

 3 x + 2 y = 5 [5] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/23/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

**5** The roots of the equation _x_^3 + _ax_^2 + _bx_ + _c_ = 0 are 1, 3 and 3. Show that _c_ = – 9 and find the value of _a_ and of _b_. [4] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/23/O/N/15 

**6** Solve the following equation. 

log ( 29 _x_ 15 ) (^3) log^22 (^2) _x_ 

### = + [5] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/23/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

**7** The velocity, _v_ ms -^1 , of a particle travelling in a straight line, _t_ seconds after passing through a fixed 

 point O , is given by ( ) 

 v 2 t 

### 10 

= (^) + 2. **(i)** Find the acceleration of the particle when _t_ = 3. [3] **(ii)** Explain why the particle never comes to rest. [1] **(iii)** Find an expression for the displacement of the particle from _O_ after time _t_ s. [3] **(iv)** Find the distance travelled by the particle between _t_ = 3 and _t_ = 8. [2] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/23/O/N/15 

**8 (i)** Prove that sec 2 _x_ + cosec 2 _x_ = sec 2 _x_ cosec^2 _x_. [4] 

 (ii) Hence, or otherwise, solve sec 2 x^ + cosec 2 x = 4 tan^2 x for 90 c 1 x 1270 c. [4] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/23/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

**9** Given that f ( ) _x_ = 3 _x_^2 + 12 _x_ + 2 , 

 (i) find values of a , b and c such that f ( ) x = a x ( + b )^2 + c , [3] 

 (ii) state the minimum value of f( x ) and the value of x at which it occurs, [2] 

**(iii)** solve f c (^1) _y_^ m = 0 , giving each answer for _y_ correct to 2 decimal places. [3] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/23/O/N/15 

**10 (i)** Given that (^) dd _x_^ e^2 _x_^ _kx_ e^2 _x_ 2 2 ^ -^ h (^) = , state the value of _k_. [1] **(ii)** Using your result from part **(i)** , find 3 e _x_ 2 _x_ d _x_ 

-^2 

## y. [2] 

 (iii) Hence find the area enclosed by the curve y 3 e x 2 x 

 2 = -^ , the x -axis and the lines x = 1 and x = 2. [2] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/23/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

 (iv) Find the coordinates of the stationary points on the curve y 3 e x 2 x 

 2 = -^. [4] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/23/O/N/15 

**11** The trees in a certain forest are dying because of an unknown virus. 

 The number of trees, N , surviving t years after the onset of the virus is shown in the table below. 

 t 1 2 3 4 5 6 

 N 2000 1300 890 590 395 260 

 The relationship between N and t is thought to be of the form N = Ab t^. 

 (i) Transform this relationship into straight line form. [1] 

 (ii) Using the given data, draw this straight line on the grid below. [3] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/23/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

 (iii) Use your graph to estimate the value of A and of b. [3] 

 If the trees continue to die in the same way, find 

 (iv) the number of trees surviving after 10 years, [1] 

 (v) the number of years taken until there are only 10 trees surviving. [2] 

 Question 12 is printed on the next page. 


© UCLES 2015 0606/23/O/N/15 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

**12** A plane that can travel at 250 kmh–1^ in still air sets off on a bearing of 070°. A wind with speed _w_ kmh–1 from the south blows the plane off course so that the plane actually travels on a bearing of 060°. 

 Find, in kmh–1, the resultant speed V of the plane and the windspeed w. [5] 


