 This document consists of 16 printed pages. 

 DC (AC/CGW) 98537/3 

 © UCLES 2015 [Turn over 

 Cambridge International Examinations 

 Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

* 1 8 0 7 0 4 5 4 9 1 * 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/13 

 Paper 1 October/November 2015 

 2 hours 

 Candidates answer on the Question Paper. 

 Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. 

 Write in dark blue or black pen. 

 You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. 

 Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. 

 DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all the questions. 

 Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of 

 angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. 

 The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. 

 You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. 

 The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. 

 The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 


©UCLES2015 0606/13/O/N/15 

 Mathematical Formulae 

## 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 Fortheequation _ax_ 

 2 

 + bx + c =0, 

 x 

 b b ac 

 a 

 = 

 − − 

 2 

 4 

 2 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

 ( a + b ) 

 n 

 = a 

 n 

 + 

# ( 

 n 

# 1 ) 

 a 

 n –1 

  b + 

# ( 

 n 

# 2 ) 

 a 

 n –2 

  b 

 2 

 +…+ 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) 

 a 

 n – r 

  b 

 r 

 +…+ b 

 n 

 , 

 where _n_ isapositiveintegerand 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) 

## = 

 n! 

 ( n – r )! r! 

##  

## 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ 

 sin 

 2 

  A +cos 

 2 

  A =1 

 sec 

 2 

  A =1+tan 

 2 

  A 

 cosec 

 2 

  A =1+cot 

 2 

  A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC_ 

 a 

 sin A 

 = 

 b 

 sin B 

 = 

 c 

 sin C 

 a 

 2 

 = b 

 2 

 + c 

 2 

 –2 bc cos A 

## ∆= 

 1 

 2 

  bc sin A 


©UCLES2015 0606/13/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

**1** OntheVenndiagramsbelow,shadetheregionsindicated. 

 (i) 

## A B 

## C 

## A   B  C  

##  

 

## [1] 

 (ii) 

## A B 

## C 

## A   B  C  

##  

 

## [1] 

 (iii) 

## A B 

## C 

##  A  B  

## ' 

##  C 

##  

 

## [1] 


©UCLES2015 0606/13/O/N/15 

**2** Solve 2 cos 3 _x_ 

## 4 

## 1 

 2 

 r 

## = 

## J 

## L 

## K 

## K 

## N 

## P 

## O 

## O 

 for 0 x 

## 3 

## G G 

 r 

## . [4] 


©UCLES2015 0606/13/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

**3 (a)** Matrices **A** and **B** aresuchthat 

## 2 

## 4 

## 1 

## 3 

## A = 

## J 

## L 

## K 

## K 

## N 

## P 

## O 

 Oand 

## 3 

## 6 

## 8 

## 0 

## 1 

## 2 

## B = 

## J 

## L 

## K 

## K 

## N 

## P 

## O 

 O.Find AB . [2] 

 (b) Giventhatmatrix 

## 4 

## 2 

## 6 

## 8 

## X = 

## 

## J 

## L 

## K 

## K 

## N 

## P 

## O 

 O,findtheintegervalueof m andof n suchthat X m X n I 

 2 

## = + , 

 where I istheidentitymatrix. [5] 

 (c) Giventhatmatrix 

 a 

 3 a 

## 2 

## Y = 

## J 

## L 

## K 

## K 

## N 

## P 

## O 

 O,findthevaluesof a forwhichdet Y =0. [2] 


©UCLES2015 0606/13/O/N/15 

**4 You are not allowed to use a calculator in this question**. 

## A B 

## C 

 (4√3+1) cm 

 Thediagramshowstriangle ABC withside AB = ( 4 3 + 1 )cm.Angle B isarightangle.Itisgiven 

 thattheareaofthistriangleis 

## 2 

## 47 

 cm 

 2 

 . 

 (i) Findthelengthoftheside BC intheform( a 3 + b )cm,where a and b areintegers. [3] 

 (ii) Hencefindthelengthoftheside AC intheform p 2cm,where p isaninteger. [2] 


©UCLES2015 0606/13/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

**5** Findtheequationofthenormaltothecurve _y_ = 5 tan _x_ 3 atthepointwhere _x_ 

## 4 

 r 

## = . [5] 


©UCLES2015 0606/13/O/N/15 

**6 (i)** On the axes below, sketch the graph of _y x_ 4 _x_ 12 

 2 

 = showing the coordinates of the 

 pointswherethegraphmeetstheaxes. [3] 

 y 

 O x 

 (ii) Findthecoordinatesofthestationarypointonthecurve y x 4 x 12 

 2 

## = . [2] 

 (iii) Findthevaluesof k suchthattheequation x 4 x 12 k 

 2 

- - = hasonly2solutions. [2] 


©UCLES2015 0606/13/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

**7** Acurve,showingtherelationshipbetweentwovariables _x_ and _y_ ,issuchthat 

 d 

 d 

 cos 

 x 

 y 

 6 3 x 

 2 

 2 

 = .Given 

 thatthecurvehasagradientof 4 3 atthepoint , 

## 9 

## 3 

 r 1 

## 

 c m ,findtheequationofthecurve. [6] 


©UCLES2015 0606/13/O/N/15 

**8 (a)** Given that the first 4 terms in the expansion of ( 2 _kx_ ) 

 8 

 +  are 256 256 x px qx 

 2 3 

 + + + , find the 

 valueof k ,of p andof q . [3] 

 (b) Findthetermthatisindependentof x intheexpansionof x 

 x 

## 2 

 2 

 9 

## 

 c m 

## . [3] 


©UCLES2015 0606/13/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

**9 (a)** Fivedifferentbooksaretobearrangedonashelf.Thereare2Mathematicsbooksand3History 

 books.Findthenumberofdifferentarrangementsofbooksif 

 (i) the Mathematics books are next to each other, [2] 

 (ii) the Mathematics books are not next to each other. [2] 

 (b) Tocompeteinaquiz,ateamof5istobechosenfromagroupof9menand6women.Findthe 

 numberofdifferentteamsthatcanbechosenif 

 (i) there are no restrictions, [1] 

 (ii)  atleasttwomenmustbeontheteam. [3] 


©UCLES2015 0606/13/O/N/15 

## 10 

 6 cm 

## A C 

## B 

## X Y 

 6 cm 

 10 cm 

 Thediagramshowsanisoscelestriangle ABC suchthat AC =10cmand AB = BC =6cm. 

 BX isanarcofacircle,centre C, and BY isanarcofacircle,centre A. 

 (i) Showthatangle ABC =1.970radians,correctto3decimalplaces. [2] 

 (ii) Findtheperimeteroftheshadedregion. [4] 


©UCLES2015 0606/13/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

 (iii) Findtheareaoftheshadedregion. [3] 


©UCLES2015 0606/13/O/N/15 

**11** Theline _x_ _y_ + 2 = 0 intersectsthecurve 2 _x y_ 2 _x_ 1 0 

 2 2 

- + + = atthepoints _A_ and _B_ .The 

 perpendicularbisectoroftheline AB intersectsthecurveatthepoints C and D .Findthelengthofthe 

 line CD intheform a 5,where a isaninteger. [10] 


©UCLES2015 0606/13/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

 Question 12 is printed on the next page. 


©UCLES2015 0606/13/O/N/15 

Permissiontoreproduceitemswherethird-partyownedmaterialprotectedbycopyrightisincludedhasbeensoughtandclearedwherepossible.Everyreasonableefforthasbeen 

madebythepublisher(UCLES)totracecopyrightholders,butifanyitemsrequiringclearancehaveunwittinglybeenincluded,thepublisherwillbepleasedtomakeamendsat 

theearliestpossibleopportunity. 

Toavoidtheissueofdisclosureofanswer-relatedinformationtocandidates,allcopyrightacknowledgementsarereproducedonlineintheCambridgeInternationalExaminations 

CopyrightAcknowledgementsBooklet.Thisisproducedforeachseriesofexaminationsandisfreelyavailabletodownloadatwww.cie.org.ukaftertheliveexaminationseries. 

CambridgeInternationalExaminationsispartoftheCambridgeAssessmentGroup.CambridgeAssessmentisthebrandnameofUniversityofCambridgeLocalExaminations 

Syndicate(UCLES),whichisitselfadepartmentoftheUniversityofCambridge. 

**12 (a)** Giventhat 2 4 128 

 2 x 1 x y 

## # = 

- + 

 and 

## 27 

## 9 

## 1 

 y 

 y x 

 4 

 2 

## = 

- 

- 

 ,findthevalueofeachoftheintegers x and y . [4] 

 (b) Solve 2 5( ) 5 1 0 

 2 z z 

## + = . [4] 


