 This document consists of 12 printed pages. 

 DC (KN/SW) 106860/4 © UCLES 2016 [Turn over 

* 9 6 6 2 4 0 1 7 0 8 * 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/22 Paper 2 May/June 2016 2 hours Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all the questions. Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 


© UCLES 2016 0606/22/M/J/16 

 Mathematical Formulae 

### 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

 x 

 b b ac a 

 = 

 − 2 − 4 2 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( _n_ 

# 1 ) a 

_n_ –1 (^) _b_ + 

# ( 

 n 

# 2 ) a 

_n_ –2 (^) _b_ (^2) + … + 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) a 

_n_ – _r_ (^) _br_ (^) + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( _n_ 

# r ) =^ 

 n! ( n – r )! r! 

### 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ 

 sin^2 A + cos^2 A = 1 

 sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A 

 cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC_ 

 a sin A =^ 

 b sin B =^ 

 c sin C 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

 ∆ = 

### 1 

 2 bc^ sin^ A 


© UCLES 2016 0606/22/M/J/16 **[Turn over** 

**1 (i)** Given that _x_^2 + 2 _kx_ + 4 _k_ 3 = 0 has no real roots, show that _k_ satisfies _k_^2 4 _k_ + 3 10. [2] 

 (ii) Solve the inequality k^2 4 k + 3 10. [2] 

**2** Variables _x_ and _y_ are related by the equation _y x_ 

 x 3 

### = 5 1 

### 

(^). **(i)** Find _x y_ d d , simplifying your answer. [2] **(ii)** Hence find the approximate change in _x_ when _y_ increases from 9 by the small amount 0.07. [3] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/22/M/J/16 

**3** A team of 3 people is to be selected from 7 women and 6 men. Find the number of different teams that could be selected if there must be more women than men on the team. [3] 

**4 Do not use a calculator in this question.** 

 The polynomial p ( ) x = 2 x^3 3 x^2 + qx + 56 has a factor x – 2. 

 (i) Show that q = −30. [1] 

 (ii) Factorise p ( ) x completely and hence state all the solutions of p ( ) x = 0. [4] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/22/M/J/16 **[Turn over** 

**5** The coordinates of three points are _A_ (−2, 6), _B_ (6, 10) and _C_ ( _p_ , 0). 

 (i) Find the coordinates of M , the mid-point of AB. [2] 

 (ii) Given that CM is perpendicular to AB , find the value of the constant p. [2] 

 (iii) Find angle MCB. [3] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/22/M/J/16 

### 6 

 O 

 A B 

 5 cm 

 i rad 

 The diagram shows a sector of a circle with centre O and radius 5 cm. The length of the arc AB is 7 cm. Angle AOB is θ radians. 

 (i) Explain why θ must be greater than 1 radian. [1] 

 (ii) Find the value of θ. [2] 

 (iii) Calculate the area of the sector AOB. [2] 

 (iv) Calculate the area of the shaded segment. [2] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/22/M/J/16 **[Turn over** 

**7** The matrix **A** is 

### 4 

### 3 

### 5 

### 2 

### J 

### L 

### KK 

### N 

### P 

 OO and the matrix B is 4 1 

### 2 

### 3 

### J 

### L 

### KK 

### N 

### P 

### OO. 

 (i) Find the matrix C such that C = 3 A + B. [2] 

 (ii) Show that det ( AB ) = det A #det B. [4] 

 (iii) Find the matrix ( AB ) -^1. [2] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/22/M/J/16 

**8** Find the coordinates of the points of intersection of the curve 4 + (^5) _y_^ + (^) _x_^3 = 0 and the line _y_ = 15 _x_ + 10. [6] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/22/M/J/16 **[Turn over** 

**9 (a)** Find _x_ 

_x x_ (^1) d _x_ 2 (^3) + 2 + 

## y.^ [3] 

**(b) (i)** Find (^) y sin ( 5 _x_ + _r_ )d _x_. [2] **(ii)** Hence evaluate sin ( 5 _x_ )d _x_ 0 5 + _r_ 

- _r_ 

## y.^ [2] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/22/M/J/16 

**10 (a)** The graph of the curve _y_ = _p_ ( 4 2 _x_ )^ _q_ ( 4 _x_ )passes through the points (0, 2) and (0.5, 14). Find the value of _p_ and of _q_. [3] 

 (b) The variables x and y are connected by the equation y = 10 2 x^ 2 10( x ). Using the substitution u = 10 x , or otherwise, find the exact value of x when y = 24. [3] 

 (c) Solve log 2 ( x + 1 ) log 2 x = 3. [3] 


© UCLES 2016 0606/22/M/J/16 **[Turn over** 

**11 (a)** A function f is defined, for all real _x_ , by 

 f ( ) x = x x^2. 

 Find the greatest value of f ( x ) and the value of x for which this occurs. [3] 

 (b) The domain of g ( ) x = x x^2 is such that g -^1 ( ) x exists. Explain why x H 1 is a suitable domain for g( x ). [1] 

 (c) The functions h and k are defined by h : x 7 lg( x + 2 ) for x 2 2 , k : x 7 5 + x 1 for 1 1 x 1 101. 

 (i) Find hk(10). [2] 

 (ii) Find k -^1 ( ) x , stating its domain and range. [5] 

 Question 12 is printed on the next page. 


© UCLES 2016 0606/22/M/J/16 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

**12** Solve the equation 

 (i) 8 sin 2 A^ + 2 cos A = 7 for 0 c G A G 180 c, [4] 

 (ii) cosec ( 3 B + 1 ) = 2 5. for 0 G B G r radians. [4] 


