 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all questions. Electronic calculators may be used. You may lose marks if you do not show your working or if you do not use appropriate units. Practical notes are provided on page 8. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. 

 CHEMISTRY 0620/51 Paper 5 Practical Test May/June 2015 1 hour 15 minutes Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: As listed in the Confidential Instructions 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certifi cate of Secondary Education 

 This document consists of 8 printed pages. 

 [Turn over 

 IB15 06_0620_51/3RP © UCLES 2015 

# *7727926786* 

 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 For Examiner’s Use 

 Total 


© UCLES 2015 0620/51/M/J/15 

**1** You are going to investigate what happens when aqueous sodium hydroxide reacts with aqueous solutions of two different acids, **A** and **B**. 

 Read all the instructions below carefully before starting the experiments. 

 Instructions You are going to carry out two experiments. 

 (a) Experiment 1 

 Use a measuring cylinder to pour 50 cm 3 of aqueous sodium hydroxide into the polystyrene cup provided. Put the cup into a 250 cm 3 beaker for support. Measure the initial temperature of the solution and record it in the table below. 

 Fill the burette with the solution of acid A provided to the 0.0 cm 3 mark. Add 5.0 cm 3 of acid A to the aqueous sodium hydroxide in the cup and stir the mixture. Measure and record the maximum temperature of the solution in the table below. Add a further 5.0 cm 3 of acid A to the cup and stir the mixture. Measure and record the temperature of the mixture in the table below. Continue to add 5.0 cm 3 portions of acid A to the cup, until a total volume of 40 cm 3 of acid has been added. Stir after each addition and measure and record the temperatures in the table. 

 At the end of this experiment, pour the solution away and rinse the polystyrene cup. 

 volume of acid A added / cm 3 

 temperature of solution in polystyrene cup / °C 

 0.0 

## 5.0 

## 10.0 

## 15.0 

## 20.0 

## 25.0 

## 30.0 

## 35.0 

## 40.0 

## [3] 


© UCLES 2015 0620/51/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

 (b) Experiment 2 

 Empty the burette and rinse it with distilled water. Half fill the burette with the solution of acid B and swirl the contents. Discard this acid. Now fill the burette to the 0.0 cm^3 mark with the solution of acid B. 

 Repeat Experiment 1 using acid B instead of acid A. Record your results in the table below. 

 volume of acid B added / cm 3 

 temperature of solution in polystyrene cup / °C 

 0.0 

## 5.0 

## 10.0 

## 15.0 

## 20.0 

## 25.0 

## 30.0 

## 35.0 

## 40.0 

## [3] 


 © UCLES 2015 0620/51/M/J/15 

 (c) Plot the results for Experiments 1 and 2 on the grid and draw a smooth line graph for each experiment. Clearly label your graphs. 

## 0 5 10 15 

 volume of acid added / cm^3 

## 20 25 30 35 40 

## 50 

## 40 

## 30 

## 20 

## 10 

temperature of solution / °C 

## [5] 

 (d) Use your graph to estimate the temperature of the reaction mixture when 8 cm 3 of acid B were added to 50 cm 3 of aqueous sodium hydroxide. 

 Show clearly on the graph how you worked out your answer. 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [2] 


© UCLES 2015 0620/51/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

 (e) What type of chemical reaction, other than neutralisation, occurs when acid A reacts with sodium hydroxide? 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

 (f) Why was the burette rinsed firstly with distilled water and then with acid B before starting Experiment 2? 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [2] 

 (g) The solutions of acids A and B are the same concentration. 

 (i) In which experiment is the maximum temperature change greater? 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [1] 

 (ii) Suggest why the maximum temperature change is greater in this experiment. 

 ............................................................................................................................................. 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [1] 

 (h) Describe one source of error in Experiment 2. Suggest an improvement to reduce this source of error. 

 source of error ........................................................................................................................... 

 improvement ........................................................................................................................ [2] 

 [Total: 20] 


© UCLES 2015 0620/51/M/J/15 

**2** You are provided with solid **C** , which is a salt containing two cations and one anion. Carry out the following tests on solid **C** recording all of your observations in the table. Conclusions must **not** be written in the table. 

 tests observations 

 tests on solid C 

 (a) Describe the appearance of solid C. ................................................................ [1] 

 (b) Use a spatula to put a little of solid C into a hard-glass test-tube. Heat the solid gently and then strongly. 

 Test any gases given off with damp pH indicator paper. 

## ...................................................................... 

## ...................................................................... 

## ................................................................ [3] 

 tests on a solution of C 

 Add about 10 cm 3 of distilled water to the rest of solid C , stopper and shake to dissolve. Divide the solution into four equal portions in four test-tubes. Carry out the following tests. 

 (c) To the first portion of the solution, add aqueous sodium hydroxide using a teat pipette. 

 Now add excess aqueous sodium hydroxide to the mixture. 

 Heat the mixture gently and test any gases given off. 

## ................................................................ [2] 

## ................................................................ [1] 

## ...................................................................... 

## ................................................................ [2] 

 (d) To the second portion of the solution, add excess aqueous ammonia. 

## ...................................................................... 

## ................................................................ [2] 

 (e) To the third portion of the solution, add a few drops of dilute nitric acid and about 

1 cm^3 of aqueous silver nitrate. (^) ................................................................ [1] **(f)** To the fourth portion of the solution, add a few drops of dilute nitric acid and about 1 cm 3 of barium nitrate solution. 

## ...................................................................... 

## ................................................................ [2] 


© UCLES 2015 0620/51/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

 (g) What does test (b) tell you about the nature of solid C? 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [2] 

 (h) What does test (e) tell you about the nature of solid C? 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

 (i) What conclusions can you draw about the identity of solid C? 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [3] 

 [Total: 20] 


© UCLES 2015 0620/51/M/J/15 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

## NOTES FOR USE IN QUALITATIVE ANALYSIS 

**Test for anions** 

 anion test test result carbonate (CO 3 2–^ ) add dilute acid effervescence, carbon dioxide produced chloride (C l –^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify with dilute nitric acid, then add aqueous silver nitrate 

 white ppt. 

 iodide (I–^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify with dilute nitric acid, then add aqueous silver nitrate 

 yellow ppt. 

 nitrate (NO 3 –^ ) [in solution] 

 add aqueous sodium hydroxide then aluminium foil; warm carefully 

 ammonia produced 

 sulfate (SO 4 2–^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify with dilute nitric acid, then aqueous barium nitrate 

 white ppt. 

**Test for aqueous cations** 

 cation effect of aqueous sodium hydroxide effect of aqueous ammonia 

 aluminium (A l 3+^ ) 

 white ppt., soluble in excess giving a colourless solution 

 white ppt., insoluble in excess 

 ammonium (NH 4 +) ammonia produced on warming – 

 calcium (Ca 2+^ ) white ppt., insoluble in excess no ppt., or very slight white ppt. 

 copper (Cu 2+^ ) light blue ppt., insoluble in excess light blue ppt., soluble in excess giving a dark blue solution 

# iron(II) (Fe2+^ ) green ppt., insoluble in excess green ppt., insoluble in excess 

# iron(III) (Fe3+^ ) red-brown ppt., insoluble in excess red-brown ppt., insoluble in excess 

 zinc (Zn 2+^ ) white ppt., soluble in excess giving a colourless solution 

 white ppt., soluble in excess giving a colourless solution 

**Test for gases** 

 gas test and test results 

 ammonia (NH 3 ) turns damp red litmus paper blue 

 carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) turns limewater milky 

chlorine (C _l_ (^) 2 ) bleaches damp litmus paper hydrogen (H 2 ) ‘pops’ with a lighted splint oxygen (O 2 ) relights a glowing splint 


