 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 14 printed pages and 2 blank pages. IB15 06_0620_13/4RP© UCLES 2015 [Turn over 

# *8479982220* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/13 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice May/June 2015 Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet^ 45 Minutes Soft clean eraserSoft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid.Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you.DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

There areanswers A (^) ,forty B, C questions on this paper. Answerand D. all questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet.A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2015 0620/13/M/J/15 

1 A sugar cube is dropped into a hot cup of tea. The tea is not stirred. Which statement explains why the tea becomes sweet? A The heated water molecules penetrate the sugar cube. B The hot tea causes the sugar to melt. C The sugar cube dissolves and its molecules diffuse. D The sugar molecules get hot and evaporate. 

2 A blue solid, X, is soluble in water. Which method is used to obtain pure solid X from an aqueous solution? A chromatography B crystallisation C filtration D neutralisation 

3 Two atoms, X and Y, can be represented as shown. 

(^4120) X (^4520) Y Which statement is not correct? A X and Y are atoms of different elements. B X and Y are isotopes. C X and Y have different mass numbers. D X and Y have the same number of electrons. 4 Two atoms have the same relative atomic mass but different chemical properties. Which row about the proton and neutron numbers of these atoms is correct? proton numbers neutron numbers A different different B different same C same different D same same 


© UCLES 2015 0620/13/M/J/15 [Turn over 

5 Which statements comparing the properties of electrons, neutrons and protons are correct? 

 neutrons and protons are both heavier than electrons 

 only electrons and neutrons are charged A   B   C   D   

6 Diamond and graphite are both macromolecules. Which statement is not correct? A Diamond and graphite contain carbon atoms only. B Diamond and graphite contain charged ions. C Diamond and graphite have high melting points. D The atoms in diamond and graphite are held together by covalent bonds. 

7 In which compounds are pairs of electrons shared between atoms? 1 methane 2 lead bromide 3 sodium chloride A 1 only B 2 only C 1 and 3 D 1, 2 and 3 

8 Aluminium oxide has the formula Al 2 O3. Which statement about aluminium oxide is correct? A 2 g of aluminium atoms are combined with 3 g of oxygen atoms. B 2 g of aluminium atoms are combined with 3 g of oxygen molecules. C Aluminium oxide has a relative molecular mass of 102. D Pure aluminium oxide contains a higher mass of oxygen than of aluminium. 


© UCLES 2015 0620/13/M/J/15 

9 Copper and hydrogen can each be formed by electrolysis. At which electrodes are these elements formed? copper hydrogen A anode anode B anode cathode C cathode anode D cathode cathode 

10 An object is electroplated with silver using an aqueous silver salt as the electrolyte. Which set of conditions is used? the object to be electroplated is the 

 the other electrode is made from A anode carbon B anode silver C cathode carbon D cathode silver 

11 Which substance does not use oxygen to produce energy? A coal B hydrogen C natural gas D uranium 

12 In which change is N 2 O 3 oxidised? 

## N 2 O 4 N 2 O 3 N 2 O 

N (^2) 

## NO 

## B 

## D 

## C 

## A 


© UCLES 2015 0620/13/M/J/15 [Turn over 

13 When pink crystals of cobalt(II) chloride are heated, steam is given off and the colour of the solid changes to blue. CoCl 2 .6H 2 O CoCl 2 + 6H 2 O What happens when water is added to the blue solid? colour temperature A changes to pink decreases B changes to pink increases C remains blue decreases D remains blue increases 

14 The diagram shows an experiment to measure the rate of a chemical reaction. dilute hydrochloric acid 

metal (^) water measuring cylinder Which change decreases the rate of reaction? A adding water to the flask B heating the flask during the reaction C using more concentrated acid D using powdered metal 15 Which reaction is not characteristic of an acid? A It dissolves magnesium oxide. B It produces ammonia from ammonium compounds. C It produces carbon dioxide from a carbonate. D It produces hydrogen from zinc metal. 


© UCLES 2015 0620/13/M/J/15 

16 Hydrochloric acid is used to clean metals. The acid reacts with the oxide layer on the surface of the metal, forming a salt and water. Which word describes the metal oxide? A alloy B base C element D indicator 

17 Which of the following methods are suitable for preparing both zinc sulfate and copper sulfate? 1 Reacting the metal oxide with warm dilute aqueous sulfuric acid. 2 Reacting the metal with dilute aqueous sulfuric acid. 3 Reacting the metal carbonate with dilute aqueous sulfuric acid. A 1 and 2 only B 1 and 3 only C 2 and 3 only D 1, 2 and 3 

18 Which gas relights a glowing splint? A ammonia B carbon dioxide C hydrogen D oxygen 

19 The noble gases, which are in Group 0 of the Periodic Table, are all very ....... 1........ ....... 2......., one of these gases, is used to provide an inert atmosphere in lamps. Another, ....... 3......., is used for filling balloons because it is less dense than air. Which words complete the sentences about noble gases? 1 2 3 A reactive argon helium B reactive helium argon C unreactive argon helium D unreactive helium argon 


© UCLES 2015 0620/13/M/J/15 [Turn over 

20 Which properties of the element titanium, Ti, can be predicted from its position in the PeriodicTable? 

 as a catalystcan be used conducts electricitywhen solid has low density^ forms colouredcompounds A     B     C     D     

21 X is a Group I metal. Y and Z are Group VII elements. When X reacts with Y a salt is formed. A solution of this salt reacts with Z to form a different salt. What are X, Y and Z? X Y Z 

A K Cl (^2) I 2 B Li Cl 2 Br 2 C Mg Br 2 Cl (^2) D Na I 2 Cl (^2) 22 In the outline of the Periodic Table below, some elements are shown as numbers. 

## 5 6 

## 1 

## 7 

## 2 

## 3 4 

 Which two numbers are metals in the same period? A 1 and 2 B 1 and 7 C 3 and 5 D 5 and 6 


© UCLES 2015 0620/13/M/J/15 

23 The diagrams show the structure of two substances used to make electrical conductors. X Y 

 Which statement correctly describes X and Y? A X is a pure metal and Y is a compound. B X is a pure metal and Y is an alloy. C X is a solid and Y is a liquid. D X is harder and stronger than Y. 

24 Which statement about the uses of aluminium, mild steel and stainless steel is correct? A Aluminium is used for food containers as it has a high density. B Mild steel is used for car bodies as it is resistant to corrosion. C Stainless steel is used for aircraft bodies as it is strong. D Stainless steel is used for cutlery as it is resistant to corrosion. 

25 Which row describes the conditions used to make steel from the iron produced by a blastfurnace? 

 calcium oxide(lime) oxygen heat A    B    C    D    


© UCLES 2015 0620/13/M/J/15 [Turn over 

26 The statements describe how different metals react with cold water. ● Calcium sinks, fizzing and releasing a steady stream of hydrogen. ● Copper does not react. ● Sodium floats, fizzing and rapidly releasing hydrogen. ● Zinc does not react but does react with steam, releasing hydrogen. Using the information, where should hydrogen be placed in the reactivity series? A below copper B between sodium and calcium C between calcium and zinc D between zinc and copper 

27 The diagram shows stages in producing drinking water. In which tank is chlorine added to the water? 

 reservoir sedimentationtank filtrationtank treatment tankanti-bacterial storagetank supplymains 

## A B C D 

28 Oxygen is a reactive element. Which row shows which of oxygen’s reactions are useful? fuel combustion rusting^ 

 steel manufacture A no no yes B no yes no C yes no yes D yes yes no 


© UCLES 2015 0620/13/M/J/15 

29 Which combination of chemical compounds could be used to produce the fertiliser shown? 

 SUPERGROW 

## N P K 

## 21 : 16 : 8 

 A (NH 4 ) 3 PO 4 , KCl B NH 4 NO 3 , Ca 3 (PO 4 ) 2 C NH 4 NO 3 , CO(NH 2 ) 2 D NH 4 NO 3 , K 2 SO 4 , (NH 4 ) 2 SO 4 

30 Below are two statements about sulfur dioxide. 1 Sulfur dioxide is formed when fossil fuels burn and it is an acidic oxide. 2 Sulfur dioxide is one of the gases in the air which is responsible for ‘acid rain’. Which is correct? A Both statements are correct and statement 1 explains statement 2. B Both statements are correct but statement 1 does not explain statement 2. C Statement 1 is correct but statement 2 is incorrect. D Statement 2 is correct but statement 1 is incorrect. 

31 Which method is not used for rust prevention? A coating working parts of industrial machinery with oil B covering wire for gardening use with plastic C immersing gardening tools in water for storage D painting car bodies 

32 Carbon dioxide and methane are ‘greenhouse gases’ which contribute to global warming. Which process does not increase global warming? A burning fossil fuels B decay of organic waste C farming cattle for beef D growing crops such as sugar cane 


© UCLES 2015 0620/13/M/J/15 [Turn over 

33 Four reactions produce carbon dioxide. 1 respiration 2 fermentation 3 combustion of methane 4 manufacture of lime Which reactions do not use oxygen from the air? A 1 and 2 B 1 and 3 C 2 and 4 D 3 and 4 

34 The diagram shows a kiln used to manufacture lime. 

 gas burners 

 product 

 air 

## Y 

## X 

 Which row identifies X and Y? X Y A lime carbon dioxide B lime steam C limestone carbon dioxide D limestone steam 

35 Which statement about the names of organic compounds is correct? A Compounds containing C=C double bonds are alkanes. B The compound of formula CH 3 CO 2 H is methanoic acid. C The compound of formula C 2 H 4 is ethane. D The compound of formula C 2 H 5 OH is an alcohol. 


© UCLES 2015 0620/13/M/J/15 

36 Which statement about petroleum is not correct? A It can be separated into useful substances by fractional distillation. B It consists mainly of hydrocarbons. C It is found underground in many parts of the world. D Its main use is for making lubricants and polishes. 

37 Ethene, propene and butene are all members of the same homologous series. Which statement explains why ethene, propene and butene have similar chemical properties? A They all have the same functional group. B They are all gases at room temperature. C They are all hydrocarbons. D They are all organic. 

38 Which statement describes the compound shown below? 

 H C C 

## O 

## O 

## H 

## H H 

 A It is a colourless flammable gas. B It is a liquid which decolourises bromine water. C It is a liquid with a characteristic smell. D It is formed when ethane reacts with steam. 

39 A hydrocarbon A is cracked to make B and hydrogen. Compound C is formed by the addition polymerisation of B. To which homologous series do A, B and C belong? alkene alkane A A B and C B B A and C C C A and B D – A and C 


© UCLES 2015 0620/13/M/J/15 

40 Ethanol is manufactured from petroleum by reacting ethene with steam. Which statements about this process are correct? 1 Ethene is obtained from the cracking of alkanes. 2 The process is carried out in the presence of yeast. 3 The reaction is an addition reaction. 4 The rate of reaction is increased by a catalyst. A 1 and 3 only B 1 and 4 only C 1, 2 and 3 D 1, 3 and 4 


© UCLES 2015 0620/13/M/J/15 

## BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2015 0620/13/M/J/15 

## BLANK PAGE 


To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeInternational Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. © UCLES 2015 0620/13/M/J/15 

 Group 

(^140) **Ce** Cerium 58 141 **Pr** Praseodymium 59 (^144) **Nd** Neodymium 60 **Pm** Promethium 61 (^150) **Sm** Samarium 62 (^152) **Eu** Europium 63 (^157) **Gd** Gadolinium 64 (^159) **Tb** Terbium 65 (^162) **Dy** Dysprosium 66 (^165) **Ho** Holmium 67 167 **Er** Erbium 68 (^169) **Tm** Thulium 69 (^173) **Yb** Ytterbium 70 (^175) **Lu** Lutetium 71 (^232) **Th** Thorium 90 **Pa** Protactinium 91 238^ **U** Uranium 92 **Np** Neptunium 93 **Pu** Plutonium 94 **Am** Americium 95 **Cm** Curium 96 **Bk** Berkelium 97 **Cf** Californium 98 **Es** Einsteinium 99 **Fm** Fermium 100 **Md** Mendelevium 101 **No** Nobelium 102 **Lr** Lawrencium 103 (^1) **H** Hydrogen 1 (^7) **Li** Lithium 3 23^ **Na**^ Sodium 11 (^24) **Mg** Magnesium 1240 **Ca** Calcium 20 (^45) **Sc** Scandium 21 (^48) **Ti** Titanium 22 51 **V** Vanadium 23 (^52) **Cr** Chromium 24 (^55) **Mn** Manganese 25 (^56) **Fe** Iron 26 (^59) **Co** Cobalt 27 (^59) **Ni** Nickel 28 (^64) **Cu** Copper 29 (^65) **Zn** Zinc 30 11 **B** Boron 5 27 **A** **_l_** Aluminium 1370 **Ga** Gallium 31 (^12) **C** Carbon 6 14 **N** Nitrogen 7 (^16) **O** Oxygen 8 19 **F** Fluorine 9 (^28) **Si** Silicon 14 31 **P** Phosphorus 15 32 **S** Sulfur 16 35.5 **C** **_l_** Chlorine 17 (^40) **Ar** Argon 18 (^20) **Ne** Neon 10 (^4) **He** Helium 2 (^73) **Ge** Germanium 32 (^75) **As** Arsenic 33 (^79) **Se** Selenium 34 (^80) **Br** Bromine 35 (^84) **Kr** Krypton 36 39 **K** Potassium 19 (^88) **Sr** Strontium 38 89 **Y** Yttrium 39 (^91) **Zr** Zirconium 40 (^93) **Nb** Niobium 41 (^96) **Mo** Molybdenum 42 **Tc** Technetium 43 (^101) **Ru** Ruthenium 44 (^103) **Rh** Rhodium 45 (^106) **Pd** Palladium 46 (^108) **Ag** Silver 47 (^112) **Cd** Cadmium 48 (^115) **In** Indium 49 (^119) **Sn**^ Tin 50 (^122) **Sb** Antimony 51 (^128) **Te** Tellurium 52 127^ **I** Iodine 53 (^131) **Xe** Xenon 54 (^137) **Ba** Barium 56 (^139) **La** Lanthanum 57 * 178 **Hf** Hafnium 72 (^181) **Ta** Tantalum 73 184 **W** Tungsten 74 (^186) **Re** Rhenium 75 (^190) **Os** Osmium 76 (^192) **Ir** Iridium 77 195 **Pt** Platinum 78 (^197) **Au** Gold 79 (^201) **Hg** Mercury 80 204 **T** **_l_** Thallium 81 (^207) **Pb** Lead 82 209 **Bi** Bismuth 83 **Po** Polonium 84 **At** Astatine 85 **Rn** Radon 86 **Fr** Francium 87 (^227) **Ac** Actinium 89 (^9) **Be** Beryllium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ 0 (^85) **Rb** Rubidium 37133 **Cs** Caesium 55 (^226) **Ra** Radium 88 The volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). a **X** b a = relative atomic mass= atomic symbol **X**^ b = proton (atomic) number *58-71 Lanthanoid series90-103 Actinoid seriesKey **DATA SHEET The Periodic Table of the Elements** 


