 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 19 printed pages and 1 blank page. 

 IB17 06_0625_11_ML/2RP © UCLES 2017 [Turn over 

## *8820004965* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

### PHYSICS 0625/11 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) May/June 2017 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB recommended) 

 MODIFIED LANGUAGE 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. Take the weight of 1.0 kg to be 10 N (acceleration of free fall = 10 m / s 2 ). 


© UCLES 2017 0625/11/M/J/17 

**1** A stopwatch is used to time a runner in a race. The diagrams show the stopwatch at the start and at the end of the race. 

 min s 1 / 100 s 

 start 

 min s 1 / 100 s 

 end 

 How long did the runner take to run the race? 

 A 70.00 seconds 

 B 110.00 seconds 

 C 115.20 seconds 

 D 155.20 seconds 

**2** On Earth, a ball is dropped and falls 2.0 m in a vacuum. 

 The acceleration of the ball at 1.0 m is 10 m / s 2. 

 0 m 

 0.5 m 

 1.0 m 

 1.5 m 

 2.0 m 

 ball 

 What is the acceleration of the ball at 0.5 m? 

 A 5.0 m / s^2 B 10 m / s 2 C 15 m / s 2 D 20 m / s 2 


© UCLES 2017 0625/11/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**3** The speed-time graph represents a motorcycle journey. 

 In which part of the graph is the acceleration equal to zero? 

### 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 

### 40 

### 30 

### 20 

### 10 

### 0 

### 0 

 speed m / s 

### AA 

### BB 

### CC 

### DD 

 time / s 

**4** Diagram 1 shows a sealed plastic bottle containing a hollow glass sphere and a steel ball. 

 Diagram 2 shows the same bottle after it has been shaken. 

 Diagram 3 shows the same bottle after it has been shaken again until the broken glass is in tiny pieces. 

 sealed plastic bottle 

steel ball 

 hollow glass 

sphere (^) steel ball broken glass steel ball tiny pieces of broken glass diagram 1 diagram 2 diagram 3 The mass of the bottle and contents in diagram 1 is _m_ 1. The mass of the bottle and contents in diagram 2 is _m_ 2. The mass of the bottle and contents in diagram 3 is _m_ 3. Which statement gives the correct relation between _m_ 1 , _m_ 2 and _m_ 3? **A** _m_ 1 is equal to _m_ 2 and _m_ 2 is equal to _m_ 3. **B** _m_ 1 is greater than _m_ 2 and _m_ 2 is greater than _m_ 3. **C** _m_ 1 is less than _m_ 2 and _m_ 2 is greater than _m_ 3. **D** _m_ 1 is less than _m_ 2 and _m_ 2 is less than _m_ 3. 


© UCLES 2017 0625/11/M/J/17 

**5** A student is weighed on laboratory scales. 

 Which row about weight and mass is correct? 

 unit of weight unit of mass 

 A kg kg 

 B kg N 

 C N kg 

 D N N 

**6** A measuring cylinder containing only water is placed on an electronic balance. A small, irregularly shaped stone is now completely immersed in the water. 

 The diagrams show the equipment before and after the stone is immersed. 

 100 90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 

 measuring cylinder 

 water 

 balance 

# g 

 before the stone is immersed 

 100 90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 

# g 

 after the stone is immersed 

 cm 3 cm^3 

 stone 

 What is the density of the material of the stone? 

 A 1.7 g / cm^3 B 3.3 g / cm^3 C 4.5 g / cm^3 D 8.7 g / cm^3 


© UCLES 2017 0625/11/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**7** A boat is travelling at a steady speed in a straight line across the surface of a lake. 

 Which statement about the boat is correct? 

 A The resultant force on the boat is in the direction of motion. 

 B The resultant force on the boat is in the opposite direction to its motion. 

 C The resultant force on the boat is vertically downwards. 

 D The resultant force on the boat is zero. 

**8** The diagram shows three uniform, solid wooden blocks with a square cross-sectional area resting on a horizontal table. 

 table 

### P Q R 

 Which list puts the blocks in order from the least stable to the most stable? 

 A P → Q → R 

 B P → R → Q 

 C R → P → Q 

 D R → Q → P 

**9** Energy resources are used to generate electricity. 

 Which resource is renewable and does not release carbon dioxide when being used to produce electricity? 

 A biomass 

 B nuclear 

 C oil 

 D wind 


© UCLES 2017 0625/11/M/J/17 

**10** A student does some simple exercises. 

 In which exercise is the most work done? 

 1 kg 

 lifting through 1 m 

### A 

 1 kg 

 pushing through 1 m against a frictional force of 4 N 

### B 

 2 kg 

 lifting through 2 m 

 2 kg 

 pulling through 2 m against a frictional force of 2 N 

### C D 

**11** The diagram shows a box of dimensions 6.0 cm × 8.0 cm × 4.0 cm. 

 8.0 cm 

 6.0 cm 

 4.0 cm 

### X 

### Y 

### Z 

 The box rests on a flat horizontal surface. 

 On which face must the box rest to exert the least pressure? 

 A face X 

 B face Y 

 C face Z 

 D The pressure is the same for all the faces. 


© UCLES 2017 0625/11/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**12** Two identical fish tanks are filled to the same level with water. 

 One tank contains fresh water. The other tank contains sea-water. 

 Sea-water is more dense than fresh water. 

 Which fish experiences the greatest pressure? 

 fresh water sea-water 

### C 

### A 

### D 

### B 

**13** A student has a syringe which has its open end sealed. The syringe is completely filled with a certain substance, as shown in diagram 1. The student pushes the piston of the syringe in as far as possible, as shown in diagram 2. 

 sealed end 

 syringe piston 

 diagram 1 diagram 2 

 What is in the syringe? 

 A a gas and a liquid 

 B a solid and a liquid 

 C a liquid only 

 D a solid only 

**14** When a microscope is used to look at smoke particles in air, Brownian motion is observed. 

 What causes the smoke particles to move at random? 

 A Smoke particles are hit by air molecules. 

 B Smoke particles are moved by convection currents in the air. 

 C Smoke particles have different weights and fall at different speeds. 

 D Smoke particles hit the walls of the container. 


© UCLES 2017 0625/11/M/J/17 

**15** The diagram shows a metal foot bridge located in the Sahara desert where the temperature is much less at night than during the day. The ends of the bridge are firmly fixed to the sides of a narrow valley. 

 The solid line shows the bridge during the coldest part of the night. 

 Which dotted line shows the bridge at the hottest part of the day? 

 A 

### B 

### C 

### D 

**16** Equal masses of two different liquids are put into identical beakers. 

 Liquid 1 is heated for 100 s and liquid 2 is heated for 200 s by heaters of the same power. 

 Each liquid has the same rise in temperature. 

 liquid 1 liquid 2 

 heating time = 100 s heating time = 200 s 

 different liquids of same mass 

 Which statement is correct? 

 A Each beaker of liquid has the same thermal capacity. 

 B Each beaker of liquid receives the same energy. 

 C Liquid 1 receives more energy than liquid 2. 

 D The thermal capacity of liquid 1 is less than the thermal capacity of liquid 2. 


© UCLES 2017 0625/11/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**17** It is a warm and humid day. A glass contains an iced drink. Water starts to form on the outside of the glass. 

 What is the name of the effect by which the water forms? 

 A condensation 

 B conduction 

 C convection 

 D evaporation 

**18** A copper bar and a wooden bar are joined. A piece of paper is wrapped tightly around the join. 

 The bar is heated strongly at the centre for a short time, and the paper goes brown on one side only. 

 wood paper copper 

 heat 

 Which side goes brown, and what does this show about wood and copper? 

 brown side wood copper 

 A copper conductor insulator 

 B copper insulator conductor 

 C wood conductor insulator 

 D wood insulator conductor 


© UCLES 2017 0625/11/M/J/17 

**19** Four identical metal plates are painted either black or white and have either a dull or a shiny surface. 

 They are heated to the same temperature. 

 Which plate radiates thermal energy at the greatest rate? 

 A the plate that is dull and black 

 B the plate that is dull and white 

 C the plate that is shiny and black 

 D the plate that is shiny and white 

**20** What causes the change in direction when light travels from air into glass? 

 A The amplitude of the light changes. 

 B The colour of the light changes. 

 C The frequency of the light changes. 

 D The speed of the light changes. 

**21** The diagram shows rays of light passing through a converging lens. 

 Which labelled arrow represents the focal length of the lens? 

### A 

### B 

### D 

### C 


© UCLES 2017 0625/11/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**22** Which diagram shows what happens when a ray of white light passes through a prism? 

 A 

 spectrum 

### B 

 spectrum 

### C 

 spectrum 

### D 

 spectrum 

 white light 

 white light 

 white light 

 white light 

**23** The diagrams show four sources of waves. 

 Which source produces longitudinal waves? 

 A B C D 

 stick pushed up and down in water 

 radio transmitter 

 loudspeaker lamp 


© UCLES 2017 0625/11/M/J/17 

**24** The table shows different types of wave in the electromagnetic spectrum. 

 radio waves 

 microwaves 

 infra-red waves 

 visible light 

 ultraviolet waves X-rays^ 

 gamma rays 

 Where do all the waves travel at the same speed? 

 A in a vacuum 

 B in diamond 

 C in glass 

 D in water 

**25** A fire alarm is not loud enough and the pitch is too low. An engineer adjusts the alarm so that it produces a louder note of a higher pitch. 

 What effect does this have on the amplitude and on the frequency of the sound? 

 amplitude frequency 

 A larger greater 

 B larger smaller 

 C smaller greater 

 D smaller smaller 


© UCLES 2017 0625/11/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**26** In a child’s toy, a metal rod is used to lift metal fish out of a toy pond. The fish are magnetically attracted to the end of the rod. There is no magnetic force between the fish. 

 toy pond 

 metal rod 

 metal fish 

 What are possible materials from which the fish and the rod are made? 

 fish rod 

 A aluminium soft iron 

 B aluminium steel 

 C soft iron soft iron 

 D soft iron steel 

**27** Which diagram shows the pattern of magnetic field lines around a bar magnet? 

### N S 

### A 

### N S 

### B 

### N S 

### C 

### N S 

### D 


© UCLES 2017 0625/11/M/J/17 

**28** A student rubs a plastic rod with a cloth. 

 The rod becomes positively charged. 

 What has happened to the rod? 

 A It has gained electrons. 

 B It has gained protons. 

 C It has lost electrons. 

 D It has lost protons. 

**29** The circuit shows a 2.0 Ω resistor and a 1.0 Ω resistor connected to a 12 V battery. 

### 2.0 Ω 

### 12 V 

### 1.0 Ω 

 What is the current in the 2.0 Ω resistor? 

 A 4.0 A B 6.0 A C 24 A D 36 A 

**30** A computer engineer wants the speed of a fan to increase automatically when the temperature inside a computer rises. The engineer knows that a larger current causes the fan to turn more quickly. 

 power supply 

### X 

 fan motor 

 computer 

### M 

 Which component should be placed at X to make this happen? 

 A a relay 

 B a thermistor 

 C a transformer 

 D a variable resistor 


© UCLES 2017 0625/11/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**31** The diagram shows a power supply with a constant electromotive force (e.m.f.). It is connected to a voltmeter, a variable resistor and two identical lamps, P and Q. Both lamps are lit. 

### V 

### Q 

### P 

 The resistance of the variable resistor is increased. The voltmeter reading remains unchanged. 

 What happens to the brightness of the lamps? 

 lamp P lamp Q 

 A brighter brighter 

 B dimmer dimmer 

 C dimmer unchanged 

 D unchanged unchanged 


© UCLES 2017 0625/11/M/J/17 

**32** A student connects a variable potential divider (potentiometer) circuit. 

### R 

### S 

T (^) V 

### 12 V 

 As the sliding terminal T is moved from R to S, what happens to the reading on the voltmeter? 

 A It decreases from 12 V to 0 V. 

 B It increases from 0 V to 12 V. 

 C It remains at 0 V. 

 D It remains at 12 V. 

**33** A light-dependent resistor (LDR) and a resistor R are connected in a series circuit. Light falls on the LDR. 

### A 

### R 

 The brightness of the light falling on the LDR decreases. 

 What happens to the resistance of the LDR and what happens to the reading on the ammeter? 

 resistance of LDR 

 reading on ammeter 

 A decreases decreases 

 B decreases increases 

 C increases decreases 

 D increases increases 


© UCLES 2017 0625/11/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**34** A circuit-breaker is designed to protect a circuit which usually carries a current of 2 A. 

 The time taken to break the circuit depends on the current, as shown in the graph. 

 0.16 

 0.14 

 0.12 0.10 

 0.08 

 0.06 

 0.04 

 0.02 

 0 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 

 current / A 

 time taken to break the circuit / s 

 What happens when the current in the circuit is 2 A and what happens when the current is 18 A? 

 when the current is 2 A when the current is 18 A 

 A the circuit breaks in less than 0.01 s the circuit breaks in less than 0.01 s 

 B the circuit breaks in less than 0.01 s the circuit does not break 

 C the circuit does not break the circuit breaks in less than 0.01 s 

 D the circuit does not break the circuit does not break 


© UCLES 2017 0625/11/M/J/17 

**35** The diagram shows a transformer with primary coil P and secondary coil S. The input potential difference across coil P is _V_ P. The output potential difference across coil S is _V_ S. The number of turns in coil P is _N_ P. The number of turns in coil S is _N_ S. 

 output 

 core 

 input P^ S 

 Which equation relates the input and output voltages to the numbers of turns in P and in S? 

### A 

 S 

 P V 

### V 

### = 

 S 

 P N 

### N 

### B V P × V S = N P × N S 

### C 

 S 

 P V 

### V 

### = 

 P 

 S N 

### N 

### D 

 S 

 P V 

### V 

### = 

( (^) P S) P _N N_ 

### N 

### + 

**36** What is the purpose of a relay? 

 A to change a large voltage into a small voltage 

 B to change a small voltage into a large voltage 

 C to use a large current to switch on a small current 

 D to use a small current to switch on a large current 

**37** Which row gives the relative charge of an electron, a neutron and a proton? 

 electron neutron proton 

 A –1 0 –1 

 B –1 0 +1 

 C +1 –1 0 

 D +1 0 +1 


© UCLES 2017 0625/11/M/J/17 

**38** An element has two isotopes. 

 Which row compares the numbers of particles in the nuclei of the atoms of these isotopes? 

 number of neutrons 

 number of protons 

 number of nucleons 

 A different the same different 

 B different the same the same 

 C the same different different 

 D the same different the same 

**39** A hospital doctor is using a source of γ-rays for a medical treatment. 

 Each diagram shows a view from above of the treatment room. 

 Which diagram shows the best way to protect the doctor and staff in the corridor from the γ-rays? 

 A 

 dense concrete source of γ-rays 

 source of γ-rays 

 source of γ-rays 

 source of γ-rays 

 corridor 

 doctor 

### B 

 dense concrete 

corridor (^) doctor 

### C 

 dense concrete 

 corridor 

 doctor 

### D 

 dense concrete 

corridor (^) doctor wooden door wooden door wooden door wooden door **40** A sample of radioactive isotope is decaying. The nuclei of which atoms will decay first? **A** It is impossible to know because radioactive decay is random. **B** It is impossible to know unless the age of the material is known. **C** The atoms near the centre will decay first because they are surrounded by more atoms. **D** The atoms near the surface will decay first because the radiation can escape more easily. 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2017 0625/11/M/J/17 

### BLANK PAGE 


