 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 18 printed pages and 2 blank pages. 

 IB17 06_0625_21_VI_LIL/FP © UCLES 2017 [Turn over 

## *8388841185* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

### PHYSICS 0625/21 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) May/June 2017 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. Take the weight of 1.0 kg to be 10 N (acceleration of free fall = 10 m / s 2 ). 


© UCLES 2017 0625/21/M/J/17 

**1** What is the most accurate and precise method to measure the thickness of a coin? 

 A Use a micrometer screw gauge. 

 B Use a ruler and look at the scale perpendicularly. 

 C Use a top pan balance. 

 D Use the displacement method with water in a measuring cylinder. 

**2** On Earth, a ball is dropped and falls 2.0 m in a vacuum. 

 The acceleration of the ball at 1.0 m is 10 m / s 2. 

 0 m 

 0.5 m 

 1.0 m 

 1.5 m 

 2.0 m 

 ball 

 What is the acceleration of the ball at 0.5 m? 

 A 5.0 m / s^2 B 10 m / s 2 C 15 m / s 2 D 20 m / s 2 

**3** A skydiver reaches terminal velocity. Then he opens his parachute. 

 What happens to the skydiver as the parachute opens? 

 A There is a decrease in weight. 

 B There is acceleration upwards. 

 C There is an increase in speed. 

 D There is movement upwards. 


© UCLES 2017 0625/21/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**4** A piece of steel is taken from the Earth to the Moon for an experiment. The gravitational field strength on the Moon is smaller than on the Earth. 

 Which statement about the piece of steel is correct? 

 A It has less mass on the Moon than on the Earth. 

 B It has more mass on the Moon than on the Earth. 

 C It weighs less on the Moon than on the Earth. 

 D It weighs more on the Moon than on the Earth. 

**5** A measuring cylinder containing only water is placed on an electronic balance. A small, irregularly shaped stone is now completely immersed in the water. 

 The diagrams show the equipment before and after the stone is immersed. 

 100 90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 

 measuring cylinder 

 water 

 balance 

# g 

 before the stone is immersed 

 100 90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 

# g 

 after the stone is immersed 

 cm 3 cm^3 

 stone 

 What is the density of the material of the stone? 

 A 1.7 g / cm^3 B 3.3 g / cm^3 C 4.5 g / cm^3 D 8.7 g / cm^3 


© UCLES 2017 0625/21/M/J/17 

**6** A boat is travelling at a steady speed in a straight line across the surface of a lake. 

 Which statement about the boat is correct? 

 A The resultant force on the boat is in the direction of motion. 

 B The resultant force on the boat is in the opposite direction to its motion. 

 C The resultant force on the boat is vertically downwards. 

 D The resultant force on the boat is zero. 

**7** A ball of weight 1.2 N drops through the air at terminal velocity. 

 A sudden gust of wind exerts a horizontal force of 0.5 N on the ball from the left. 

 Which diagram shows the resultant force on the ball while the wind is blowing? 

 ball 

 resultant force 

### 1.2 N 

### 0.5 N 

### A 

 ball 

 resultant force 

### 1.2 N 

### 0.5 N 

### B 

 resultant force 

### 0.5 N 

### C 

 ball 

 resultant force 

### 1.2 N 

### 1.2 N 

### 1.2 N 

### 0.5 N 

### D 

 ball 


© UCLES 2017 0625/21/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**8** The diagram shows a uniform bridge, 4.0 m long and weighing 10 000 N. 

 The bridge is pivoted at one end. A force at the other end gradually increases until the bridge begins to lift. 

 pivot 

 bridge 

 4.0 m 

 lifting force 

 What is the lifting force as the bridge starts to move upwards? 

 A 2500 N B 5000 N C 10 000 N D 20 000 N 

**9** A bullet of mass 0.10 kg travels horizontally at a speed of 600 m / s. It strikes a stationary wooden block of mass 1.90 kg resting on a frictionless, horizontal surface. 

 The bullet stays in the block. 

 What is the speed of the bullet and the block immediately after the impact? 

 A 30 m / s B 32 m / s C 60 m / s D 134 m / s 


© UCLES 2017 0625/21/M/J/17 

**10** A box of mass _m_ slides down a slope of length _l_ and vertical height _d_ against a frictional force _F_. 

 d 

 l 

 mass m 

 F 

 stop 

 As the box slides down the slope, it loses gravitational potential energy and it does work against the friction. 

 Which row gives the loss in gravitational potential energy and the work done against friction? 

 loss in gravitational potential energy 

 work done against friction 

 A mgd Fl 

 B mgd Fd 

 C mgl Fl 

 D mgl Fd 

**11** The diagram represents the energy transfers for a device. 

 input energy 

 wasted output energy 

 useful output energy 

 The device is 50% efficient. 

 Which equation is correct? 

 A input energy = useful output energy ÷ 2 

 B useful output energy = wasted output energy ÷ 2 

 C wasted output energy = useful output energy 

 D wasted output energy = useful output energy ÷ 2 


© UCLES 2017 0625/21/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**12** A student carries out some simple exercises. 

 In which exercise is the most work done? 

 1 kg 

 lifting through 1 m 

### A 

 1 kg 

 pushing through 1 m against a frictional force of 4 N 

### B 

 2 kg 

 lifting through 2 m 

 2 kg 

 pulling through 2 m against a frictional force of 2 N 

### C D 

**13** Four different liquids are poured into four containers. 

 The diagrams show the depth and the density of liquid in each container. 

 In which container is the pressure on its base the greatest? 

 A 

 liquid density = 3.1 g / cm 3 

 10 cm 

### B 

 liquid density = 1.2 g / cm^3 

 20 cm 

### C 

 liquid density = 1.3 g / cm^3 

 30 cm 

### D 

 liquid density = 0.8 g / cm^3 

 40 cm 


© UCLES 2017 0625/21/M/J/17 

**14** Brownian motion is observed when using a microscope to look at smoke particles in air. 

 What causes the smoke particles to move at random? 

 A Smoke particles are hit by air molecules. 

 B Smoke particles are moved by convection currents in the air. 

 C Smoke particles have different weights and fall at different speeds. 

 D Smoke particles hit the walls of the container. 

**15** Gas molecules striking a container wall cause a pressure to be exerted on the wall. 

 Which statement explains this? 

 A When a molecule rebounds there must be a change in its energy. 

 B When a molecule rebounds there must be a change in its momentum. 

 C When a molecule rebounds there must be a change in its speed. 

 D When a molecule rebounds there must be a change in its temperature. 


© UCLES 2017 0625/21/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**16** Equal masses of two different liquids are put into identical beakers. 

 Liquid 1 is heated for 100 s and liquid 2 is heated for 200 s by heaters of the same power. 

 Each liquid has the same rise in temperature. 

 liquid 1 liquid 2 

 heating time = 100 s heating time = 200 s 

 different liquids of same mass 

 Which statement is correct? 

 A Each beaker of liquid has the same thermal capacity. 

 B Each beaker of liquid receives the same energy. 

 C Liquid 1 receives more energy than liquid 2. 

 D The thermal capacity of liquid 1 is less than the thermal capacity of liquid 2. 

**17** Water of mass 100 g at a temperature of 100 °C is converted into steam at 100 °C. The specific latent heat of vaporisation of water is 2300 J / g. 

 How much thermal energy is absorbed by the water? 

 A 23 J B 230 J C 230 000 J D 23 000 000 J 


© UCLES 2017 0625/21/M/J/17 

**18** A copper bar and a wooden bar are joined. A piece of paper is wrapped tightly around the join. 

 The bar is heated strongly at the centre for a short time, and the paper goes brown on one side only. 

 wood paper copper 

 heat 

 Which side goes brown, and what does this show about wood and copper? 

 brown side wood copper 

 A copper conductor insulator 

 B copper insulator conductor 

 C wood conductor insulator 

 D wood insulator conductor 


© UCLES 2017 0625/21/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**19** Different waves hit barriers with different sized gaps. 

 The waves will diffract. 

 In which diagram does the greatest spreading occur? 

 gap 2.0 cm 

### A 

 barrier 

 wavelength 1.0 cm 

 gap 2.0 cm 

### B 

 barrier 

 wavelength 2.0 cm 

 wavelength 2.0 cm 

 gap 3.0 cm 

### C 

 barrier 

 wavelength 1.0 cm 

 gap 3.0 cm 

### D 

 barrier 

**20** A converging lens is used as a magnifying glass to view an object. 

 Which statement is correct? 

 A The image is inverted. 

 B The image is nearer the lens than the object. 

 C The image is the same size. 

 D The image is virtual. 


© UCLES 2017 0625/21/M/J/17 

**21** Which diagram shows what happens when a ray of white light passes through a prism? 

 A 

 spectrum 

### B 

 spectrum 

### C 

 spectrum 

### D 

 spectrum 

 white light 

 white light 

 white light 

 white light 

**22** Light travels in a vacuum and then enters a glass block. The speed of the light in the glass block is 2.0 × 10 8 m / s. 

 Which statement about the speed of light is correct? 

 A The speed in a vacuum is 1.5 times the speed in the glass. 

 B The speed in the glass is the same as the speed in a vacuum. 

 C The speed in the glass is 1.5 times the speed in a vacuum. 

 D The speed in the glass is 1.0 × 10 8 times the speed in a vacuum. 

**23** A fire alarm is not loud enough and the pitch is too low. An engineer adjusts the alarm so that it produces a louder note of a higher pitch. 

 What effect does this have on the amplitude and on the frequency of the sound? 

 amplitude frequency 

 A larger greater 

 B larger smaller 

 C smaller greater 

 D smaller smaller 


© UCLES 2017 0625/21/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**24** In a child’s toy, metal fish are lifted out of a toy pond using a metal rod. The fish are magnetically attracted to the end of the rod. There is no magnetic force between the fish themselves. 

 toy pond 

 metal rod 

 metal fish 

 What are possible materials from which the fish and the rod are made? 

 fish rod 

 A aluminium soft iron 

 B aluminium steel 

 C soft iron soft iron 

 D soft iron steel 

**25** What is the most effective method of demagnetising a bar magnet? 

 A placing the magnet in a solenoid carrying a large alternating current and gradually decreasing the current 

 B placing the magnet in a solenoid carrying a large direct current and gradually decreasing the current 

 C placing the magnet in a solenoid that produces a magnetic field in the opposite direction to the magnet 

 D placing the magnet next to an identical bar magnet with its poles in the opposite direction 

**26** A magnet near a coil of wire is attracted to the coil only when there is a current in the coil. 

 Which statement explains this force of attraction? 

 A The coil of wire has its own gravitational field. 

 B The coil of wire is made from soft iron. 

 C The current in the coil of wire creates a magnetic field. 

 D The current in the coil of wire induces a charge on the magnet. 


© UCLES 2017 0625/21/M/J/17 

**27** A student rubs a plastic rod with a cloth. 

 The rod becomes positively charged. 

 What has happened to the rod? 

 A It has gained electrons. 

 B It has gained protons. 

 C It has lost electrons. 

 D It has lost protons. 

**28** Which quantity is measured in coulombs? 

 A charge 

 B current 

 C electromotive force 

 D power 

**29** A cylinder of conducting putty has length _l_ , diameter _d_ and resistance _R_. The putty is now moulded into a cylinder of diameter 2 _d_ that has the same volume. 

### R 

 l 

 d 

 By which factor does the resistance of the putty cylinder decrease? 

 A 2 B 4 C 8 D 16 

**30** The average current during a lightning strike between a cloud and the ground is 1.5 × 10 4 A. 

 The lightning releases 3.0 × 10 8 J of energy and lasts for 2.0 × 10 –4^ s. 

 What is the average electromotive force (e.m.f.) between the cloud and the ground? 

 A 4.0 V B 100 V C 1.0 × 10 8 V D 9.0 × 10 8 V 


© UCLES 2017 0625/21/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**31** A student connects a variable potential divider (potentiometer) circuit. 

### R 

### S 

T (^) V 

### 12 V 

 What happens to the reading on the voltmeter as the sliding terminal T is moved from R to S? 

 A It decreases from 12 V to 0 V. 

 B It increases from 0 V to 12 V. 

 C It remains at 0 V. 

 D It remains at 12 V. 

**32** The circuit diagram shows a circuit with an a.c. supply, a diode and a resistor. 

 Which diagram shows how the current I in the resistor varies with time t? 

 A B 

### C D 

### 0 

### I I 

### I I 

 t t 

 t t 

### 0 

### 0 

### 0 

### 0 

### 0 

### 0 

### 0 


© UCLES 2017 0625/21/M/J/17 

**33** A light-dependent resistor (LDR) and a resistor R are connected in a series circuit. Light falls on the LDR. 

### A 

### R 

 The brightness of the light falling on the LDR decreases. 

 What happens to the resistance of the LDR and what happens to the reading on the ammeter? 

 resistance of LDR 

 reading on ammeter 

 A decreases decreases 

 B decreases increases 

 C increases decreases 

 D increases increases 

**34** The diagram shows a logic gate. 

### P 

### R 

### Q 

 Which input combinations at P and Q gives an output of 0 at R? 

### P Q 

### A 0 0 

### B 0 1 

### C 1 0 

### D 1 1 


© UCLES 2017 0625/21/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**35** A simple d.c. electric motor is fitted with a coil that rotates in a magnetic field. A commutator connects the power supply to the coil. 

 What is the purpose of the commutator? 

 A It converts a.c. into d.c. in the coil. 

 B It prevents the current from becoming too great, because the coil has a low resistance. 

 C It reverses the direction of the current in the coil after every 180° rotation of the coil. 

 D It switches the current off momentarily after every 90° rotation of the coil. 

**36** What is the purpose of a relay? 

 A to change a large voltage into a small voltage 

 B to change a small voltage into a large voltage 

 C to use a large current to switch on a small current 

 D to use a small current to switch on a large current 

**37** Which row gives the relative charge of an electron, a neutron and a proton? 

 electron neutron proton 

 A –1 0 –1 

 B –1 0 +1 

 C +1 –1 0 

 D +1 0 +1 

**38** A nuclide of element X undergoes β-decay. 

 Which statement is correct? 

 A The nucleon number increases by 1. 

 B The nucleon number stays the same. 

 C The product is another nuclide of an isotope of X. 

 D The proton number decreases by 1. 


© UCLES 2017 0625/21/M/J/17 

**39** A sample of radioactive isotope is decaying. 

 The nuclei of which atoms will decay first? 

 A It is impossible to know because radioactive decay is random. 

 B It is impossible to know unless the age of the material is known. 

 C The atoms near the centre will decay first because they are surrounded by more atoms. 

 D The atoms near the surface will decay first because the radiation can escape more easily. 

**40** A detector of ionising radiation gives a background reading of 20 counts / minute. 

 A radioactive isotope with a half-life of 2.0 days is brought near to the detector. The reading on the detector increases to 100 counts / minute. 

 How long does it take for the reading on the detector to decrease to 40 counts / minute? 

 A 2.0 days B 4.0 days C 5.0 days D 10 days 


© UCLES 2017 0625/21/M/J/17 

### BLANK PAGE 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2017 0625/21/M/J/17 

### BLANK PAGE 


