 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 18 printed pages and 2 blank pages. 

 IB17 06_0625_23_VI_YEL/FP © UCLES 2017 [Turn over 

# *3182427838* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## PHYSICS 0625/23 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) May/June 2017 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. Take the weight of 1.0 kg to be 10 N (acceleration of free fall = 10 m / s 2 ). 


© UCLES 2017 0625/23/M/J/17 

**1** What is the most accurate and precise method to measure the thickness of a coin? 

 A Use a micrometer screw gauge. 

 B Use a ruler and look at the scale perpendicularly. 

 C Use a top pan balance. 

 D Use the displacement method with water in a measuring cylinder. 

**2** A pendulum is swinging. Five students each measure the time it takes to swing through ten complete swings. 

 Three students measure the time as 17.2 s. Another student measures it as 16.9 s, and the fifth student measures it as 17.0 s. 

 What is the average period of the pendulum? 

 A 1.69 s B 1.70 s C 1.71 s D 1.72 s 

**3** Which distance-time graph represents a body whose speed is decreasing? 

 A 

## 0 

## 0 

 distance 

 time 

## B 

## 0 

## 0 

 distance 

 time 

## C 

## 0 

## 0 

 distance 

 time 

## D 

## 0 

## 0 

 distance 

 time 


© UCLES 2017 0625/23/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**4** What are the units for mass, pressure and velocity? 

 mass pressure velocity 

 A kg N s Pa 

 B kg Pa m / s 

 C N s Pa m / s 

 D Pa N s m / s 

**5** A steel ball bearing has a mass of 24 g and a density of 8.0 g / cm^3. It is lowered into a measuring cylinder containing 12 cm^3 of water. 

 What is the new water level in the cylinder? 

 A 3.0 cm^3 B 4.0 cm^3 C 15 cm^3 D 16 cm^3 

**6** The diagram shows an object being acted upon by two forces. 

## 6.0 N 3.0 N 

 What is the size of the resultant force on the object? 

 A 2.0 N B 3.0 N C 9.0 N D 18 N 


© UCLES 2017 0625/23/M/J/17 

**7** The diagram shows a man holding a sack and barrow stationary. He applies a vertical force to the handle. 

 The centre of mass and the weight of the sack and barrow are shown. The wheel acts as a pivot. 

 weight of sack and barrow 200 N 

 15 cm 45 cm 

 80 cm 

 20 cm 

 force exerted by man 

 centre of mass of sack and barrow 

 What is the magnitude of the vertical force exerted by the man? 

 A 38 N B 50 N C 67 N D 200 N 


© UCLES 2017 0625/23/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**8** The diagram shows the only two forces _F_ 1 and _F_ 2 acting on an object. The magnitude of each force is represented by the length of each arrow. 

## F 2 

## 110 ° 

## F 1 

 The resultant force acting on the object is R. 

 Which vector diagram shows how forces F 1 and F 2 add to produce R? 

## F 1 

## F 2 

## 110 ° 

## A 

## F 1 

## F 2 

## R 70 ° 

## R 

## R 

## B 

## F 1 

## F 2 

## 110 ° 

## C 

## F 1 

## F 2 

## R 

## 70 ° 

## D 


© UCLES 2017 0625/23/M/J/17 

**9** The diagrams show four bodies moving in the directions shown. The only forces acting on the bodies are shown in each diagram. 

 Which body gains the most kinetic energy when moving a distance of 1.0 m? 

 A 

 20 N 

## 10 N 

## B 

## 10 N 

## C 

## 10 N 25 N 30 N 30 N 

## D 

 movement 

 movement movement 

 movement 

**10** A steel ball is fired vertically upwards with a velocity _v_. The ball reaches a height _h_. 

 The same ball is now fired vertically upwards from the same position with a velocity 2 v. 

 Air resistance can be ignored. 

 What is the new height reached by the ball? 

 A h B 2 h C 4 h D 8 h 


© UCLES 2017 0625/23/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**11** A solar panel is used to recharge a battery. The solar panel produces 0.80 W of electrical power. The panel is 20% efficient. 

 solar panel 

 sunlight 

 power to battery 0.80 W 

 What is the power input of the sunlight onto the solar panel? 

 A 0.16 W B 4.0 W C 8.0 W D 16 W 

**12** The diagrams show four different athletes training by doing pull-ups. 

 Which athlete does the most work? 

 A 

 weight of athlete = 700 N 

 distance lifted = 0.50 m 

## B 

 weight of athlete = 700 N 

 distance lifted = 0.55 m 

## C 

 weight of athlete = 800 N 

 distance lifted = 0.50 m 

## D 

 weight of athlete = 800 N 

 distance lifted = 0.55 m 


© UCLES 2017 0625/23/M/J/17 

**13** Four different liquids are poured into four containers. 

 The diagrams show the depth and the density of liquid in each container. 

 In which container is the pressure on its base the greatest? 

 A 

 liquid density = 3.1 g / cm^3 

 10 cm 

## B 

 liquid density = 1.2 g / cm^3 

 20 cm 

## C 

 liquid density = 1.3 g / cm^3 

 30 cm 

## D 

 liquid density = 0.8 g / cm 3 

 40 cm 

**14** Brownian motion is observed when using a microscope to look at smoke particles in air. 

 What causes the smoke particles to move at random? 

 A Smoke particles are hit by air molecules. 

 B Smoke particles are moved by convection currents in the air. 

 C Smoke particles have different weights and fall at different speeds. 

 D Smoke particles hit the walls of the container. 

**15** The diagrams show four open dishes. Each dish contains water at the same temperature. 

 The dishes are different shapes and a draught blows over two of them. 

 From which container does the water evaporate at the greatest rate? 

 A 

 draught 

## B 

 draught 

 no draught no draught 

## C D 


© UCLES 2017 0625/23/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**16** Equal masses of two different liquids are put into identical beakers. 

 Liquid 1 is heated for 100 s and liquid 2 is heated for 200 s by heaters of the same power. 

 Each liquid has the same rise in temperature. 

 liquid 1 liquid 2 

 heating time = 100 s heating time = 200 s 

 different liquids of same mass 

 Which statement is correct? 

 A Each beaker of liquid has the same thermal capacity. 

 B Each beaker of liquid receives the same energy. 

 C Liquid 1 receives more energy than liquid 2. 

 D The thermal capacity of liquid 1 is less than the thermal capacity of liquid 2. 


© UCLES 2017 0625/23/M/J/17 

**17** A block of ice at –20 °C is heated until it turns to steam. The graph of temperature against thermal energy absorbed is shown. 

 The latent heat of fusion of ice is 340 kJ / kg. 

 100 

 80 

 60 

 40 

 20 

 0 

 –20 

 temperature °C 

## 0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 2200 2400 2600 

 126 kJ 1146 kJ thermal energy 2406 kJ absorbed / kJ 

 What is the mass of the ice? 

 A 1.0 kg B 2.0 kg C 3.0 kg D 4.0 kg 

**18** A copper bar and a wooden bar are joined. A piece of paper is wrapped tightly around the join. 

 The bar is heated strongly at the centre for a short time, and the paper goes brown on one side only. 

 wood paper copper 

 heat 

 Which side goes brown, and what does this show about wood and copper? 

 brown side wood copper 

 A copper conductor insulator 

 B copper insulator conductor 

 C wood conductor insulator 

 D wood insulator conductor 


© UCLES 2017 0625/23/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**19** Different waves hit barriers with different sized gaps. 

 The waves will diffract. 

 In which diagram does the greatest spreading occur? 

 gap 2.0 cm 

## A 

 barrier 

 wavelength 1.0 cm 

 gap 2.0 cm 

## B 

 barrier 

 wavelength 2.0 cm 

 wavelength 2.0 cm 

 gap 3.0 cm 

## C 

 barrier 

 wavelength 1.0 cm 

 gap 3.0 cm 

## D 

 barrier 


© UCLES 2017 0625/23/M/J/17 

**20** A converging lens is used to make an image on a screen. 

 candle 

 screen converging lens 

 image formed here 

 What type of image is formed on the screen? 

 A real and inverted 

 B real and upright 

 C virtual and inverted 

 D virtual and upright 

**21** Which diagram shows what happens when a ray of white light passes through a prism? 

 A 

 spectrum 

## B 

 spectrum 

## C 

 spectrum 

## D 

 spectrum 

 white light 

 white light 

 white light 

 white light 


© UCLES 2017 0625/23/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**22** Light travels in a vacuum and then enters a glass block. The speed of the light in the glass block is 2.0 × 10 8 m / s. 

 Which statement about the speed of light is correct? 

 A The speed in a vacuum is 1.5 times the speed in the glass. 

 B The speed in the glass is the same as the speed in a vacuum. 

 C The speed in the glass is 1.5 times the speed in a vacuum. 

 D The speed in the glass is 1.0 × 10 8 times the speed in a vacuum. 

**23** A fire alarm is not loud enough and the pitch is too low. An engineer adjusts the alarm so that it produces a louder note of a higher pitch. 

 What effect does this have on the amplitude and on the frequency of the sound? 

 amplitude frequency 

 A larger greater 

 B larger smaller 

 C smaller greater 

 D smaller smaller 

**24** In which way are a bar magnet and an electromagnet similar? 

 A A bar magnet and an electromagnet are always magnetised when stored. 

 B A bar magnet and an electromagnet can both be used to separate magnetic and non-magnetic materials. 

 C A bar magnet can be made of steel and an electromagnet uses a steel core. 

 D The magnetic field strength of a bar magnet and of an electromagnet can both be varied. 

**25** A magnet near a coil of wire is attracted to the coil only when there is a current in the coil. 

 Which statement explains this force of attraction? 

 A The coil of wire has its own gravitational field. 

 B The coil of wire is made from soft iron. 

 C The current in the coil of wire creates a magnetic field. 

 D The current in the coil of wire induces a charge on the magnet. 


© UCLES 2017 0625/23/M/J/17 

**26** A steel magnet is placed in a coil and demagnetised. 

 Which type of current is established in the coil, and how is the current changed? 

 A a direct current in the coil, then reduce the current quickly to zero 

 B a direct current in the coil, then reduce the current slowly to zero 

 C an alternating current in the coil, then reduce the current quickly to zero 

 D an alternating current in the coil, then reduce the current slowly to zero 

**27** Which material is a conductor of electricity? 

 A brass 

 B glass 

 C plastic 

 D wood 

**28** The diagrams each show a positive point charge. 

 Which diagram represents the pattern and the direction of the electric field due to the charge? 

## + 

## A 

## + 

## B 

## + 

## C D 

## + 

**29** Which quantity is equivalent to 1.0 V? 

 A 1.0 J / C B 1.0 kJ / C C 1.0 J / s D 1.0 kJ / s 

**30** A circuit contains a fixed resistor. The potential difference across the resistor is 24.0 V and the current in the resistor is 2.30 A. 

 How much energy is transferred in the resistor in a time of 17.0 minutes? 

 A 938 J B 5630 J C 56.3 kJ D 9.38 kJ 


© UCLES 2017 0625/23/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**31** A battery, an ammeter, a switch, a lamp and a resistor are connected together in a circuit. 

## A 

 With the switch open, the ammeter reads 2.4 A. When the switch is closed, this reading increases to 4.0 A. 

 What is the current through the resistor with the switch closed? 

 A 0 A B 1.6 A C 3.2 A D 6.4 A 

**32** A student connects a variable potential divider (potentiometer) circuit. 

## R 

## S 

T (^) V 

## 12 V 

 What happens to the reading on the voltmeter as the sliding terminal T is moved from R to S? 

 A It decreases from 12 V to 0 V. 

 B It increases from 0 V to 12 V. 

 C It remains at 0 V. 

 D It remains at 12 V. 


© UCLES 2017 0625/23/M/J/17 

**33** The diagram shows a circuit used to make a light detector. 

## A 

## X Y 

 One component is connected between X and Y. 

 Which component causes the ammeter reading to increase when the light gets brighter? 

 A B C D 

**34** A truth table for a type of logic gate is shown. 

 input 1 input 2 output 

 0 0 0 

 0 1 1 

 1 0 1 

 1 1 1 

 Which type of logic gate is it? 

 A AND B NOR C NOT D OR 

**35** In which device is a split-ring commutator used, and what is its purpose? 

 device purpose 

 A a.c. generator to change the direction of the current in the coil as it turns 

 B a.c. generator to change the output current from d.c. into a.c. 

 C d.c. motor to change the direction of the current in the coil as it turns 

 D d.c. motor to change the input current from a.c. into d.c. 


© UCLES 2017 0625/23/M/J/17 **[Turn over** 

**36** What is the purpose of a relay? 

 A to change a large voltage into a small voltage 

 B to change a small voltage into a large voltage 

 C to use a large current to switch on a small current 

 D to use a small current to switch on a large current 

**37** When a source of D-particles is directed towards a thin metal foil they become scattered. 

 Which observation of this experiment provides evidence for a small charged nucleus? 

 A A small proportion of the D-particles come straight back from the foil towards the source. 

 B A small proportion of the D-particles pass straight through the foil. 

 C Some of the D-particles are deflected by an angle of less than 90°. 

 D Some of the D-particles follow a curved path after leaving the foil. 

**38** Which description of a neutral atom of copper is correct? 

 A a nucleus surrounded by electrons 

 B a nucleus surrounded by molecules 

 C electrons surrounded by a nucleus 

 D electrons surrounded by molecules 

**39** A sample of radioactive isotope is decaying. 

 The nuclei of which atoms will decay first? 

 A It is impossible to know because radioactive decay is random. 

 B It is impossible to know unless the age of the material is known. 

 C The atoms near the centre will decay first because they are surrounded by more atoms. 

 D The atoms near the surface will decay first because the radiation can escape more easily. 


© UCLES 2017 0625/23/M/J/17 

**40** A student determines the half-life of a radioactive isotope. 

 The student uses a detector over five minutes and plots a graph showing how the count rate shown on the detector varies with time. 

 The count rate due to background radiation is 30 counts per minute. 

 250 

## 200 

## 150 

## 100 

## 50 

## 0 

## 0 1 2 3 4 5 

 count rate counts / minute 

 time / minutes 

 What is the half-life of this isotope? 

 A 0.30 minutes 

 B 1.2 minutes 

 C 1.5 minutes 

 D 5.0 minutes 


© UCLES 2017 0625/23/M/J/17 

## BLANK PAGE 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2017 0625/23/M/J/17 

## BLANK PAGE 


