 ® IGCSE is a registered trademark. This syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 5 printed pages. 

© UCLES 2017 **[Turn over** 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

**PHYSICS 0625/51** Paper 5 Practical Test **May/June 2017** MARK SCHEME Maximum Mark: 40 

 Published 

This mark scheme is published as an aid to teachers and candidates, to indicate the requirements of theexamination. It shows the basis on which Examiners were instructed to award marks. It does not indicate the details of the discussions that took place at an Examiners’ meeting before marking began, which would haveconsidered the acceptability of alternative answers. 

Mark schemes should be read in conjunction with the question paper and the Principal Examiner Report forTeachers. 

Cambridge will not enter into discussions about these mark schemes. Cambridge is publishing the mark schemes for the May/June 2017 series for most Cambridge IGCSECambridge International A and AS Level and Cambridge Pre-U components, and some Cambridge O Level ®^ , components. 


 Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

May/June 2017 

 Page 2 of 5 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 1(a) 

 l clearly shown^0 

## 1 

 1(b) 

 Sensible value for 

 l^0 

## 1 

 Remainder of values increasing 

 1(c) 

 Use of set square to line up with scale OR perpendicular viewingScale close to 

 /^ touching spring 

## 1 

 1(d) 

 Graph:^ Axes correctly labelled and right way round Suitable scales All plots correct to ½ small square Good line judgement, thin, continuous line 

## 1 

 1(e) 

 Expect NO. Line does not pass through origin 

## 1 

 1(f) 

 Use of 2 

 ×^ l 

 shown on graph 0 

## 1 

 L^ correct to ½ small square 

 Total: 

## 11 


 Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

May/June 2017 

 Page 3 of 5 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 2(a) 

 Sensible value for room temperature with unit °C 

## 1 

 2(b) 

 Correct times 

## 1 

 Temperatures decreasing First temperature difference greater than second Consistent significant figures for temperatures in table 

 2(c)(i) 

 Both temperature differences correct 

## 1 

 2(c)(ii) 

 Starting temperature closer to room temperature in the second case (or further from room temperature in the first case) 

 2(d) 

 Two from:Increase draught over surface of waterIncrease temperature of hot waterIncrease surface area of waterLonger time intervalsDecrease room temperatureDecrease volume of waterUse metal can instead of glass beaker 

## 2 

 2(e) 

 Uses bottom of meniscus 

## 1 

 Perpendicular to reading 

 Total: 

## 11 


 Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

May/June 2017 

 Page 4 of 5 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 3(a) 

 Ray-Trace: Normal in centre of AB and CD, on left,and FE at 30 

## °^ ± 

 1 ° to normal 

 First P 

## P 1 

 distance at least 5 2 

 cm 

## P^3 

## P^4 

 line correctly drawn to K All lines present in approximately correct positions and neat 

 3(b) 

 α^ correctly measured to 

## ±^2 

## °^ 

## 1 

 x^ correct to 2 

 mm 

 3(c) 

 α^ values 28–32 and 48–52 

## 1 

 Correct unit for 

 x^ 

 3(d) 

 Statement matches readings (Expect YES) 

## 1 

 Justification to include the idea of within (or beyond, ecf) the limits of experimental accuracy 

 3(e) 

 Any one from:Large pin separationEnsure pins verticalView bases of pinsUse thin pencil lines 

 /^ thin pins 

## 1 

 Total: 

## 11 


 Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

May/June 2017 

 Page 5 of 5 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

## 4 

## MP1 

 Diagram showing power supply, ammeter, voltmeter and resistance wire correctly connected (variable resistor optional) 

## 1 

## MP2 

 Correct symbols for ammeter and voltmeter. Variable resistor symbol correct if included. MP3 

 Measure potential difference (voltage) and current and calculate resistance. MP4 

 Repeat with other types of wire MP5 

 Key variables length and diameter stated MP6 

 One of: Repeat with different voltages (or currents). Repeat and take average of voltage and current readings.Repeat entire experiment with different length or different diameter.Use low current to prevent wire heating up.Keep temperature of wire constant.Use micrometer screw gauge to measure diameter 

 /^ thickness of wire 

## MP7 

 Table with columns for type of wire, voltage, current, resistance with correct units (V, A and 

## Ω) 

 Total: 

## 7 


