 This document has 16 pages. Blank pages are indicated. 

IB20 03_0620_12/4RP© UCLES 2020 (^) **[Turn over** 

## *3454751695* 

# Cambridge IGCSE ™ 

### CHEMISTRY 0620/12 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) February/March 2020 45 minutes You must answer on the multiple choice answer sheet. You will need: Multiple choice answer sheetSoft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) INSTRUCTIONS 

- There are **forty** questions on this paper. Answer **all** questions. 

- For each question there are four possible answersand record your choice in soft pencil on the multiple choice answer sheet. **A** , **B** , **C** and **D**. Choose the **one** you consider correct 

- Follow the instructions on the multiple choice answer sheet. 

- Write in soft pencil. 

- Write your name, centre number and candidate number on the multiple choice answer sheet in thespaces provided unless this has been done for you. 

- Do **not** use correction fluid. 

- Do **not** write on any bar codes. 

- You may use a calculator. **INFORMATION** 

- The total mark for this paper is 40. 

- Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. 

- Any rough working should be done on this question paper. 

- The Periodic Table is printed in the question paper. 


© UCLES 2020 0620/12/F/M/20 

**1** Which row represents the particles of a gas colliding most frequently? 

 pressure temperature A high high B high low C low high D low low 

**2** Which test is used to show that a sample of water is pure? **A** Evaporate the water to see if any solids remain. **B** Heat the water to check its boiling point. 

## C Test with anhydrous cobalt(II) chloride. 

 D Use universal indicator paper to check its pH. 

**3** Which piece of apparatus is used to measure 1.5 cm^3 of a solution accurately? **A** 25 cm^3 measuring cylinder **B** 25 cm^3 pipette **C** 50 cm^3 measuring cylinder **D** 50 cm^3 burette 

**4** A representation of an atom is shown. 

### + 

### + 

### + 

### ++ + 

### – 

### – 

### – – – – 

 What is the nucleon number of this atom? A 6 B 7 C 12 D 13 


© UCLES 2020 0620/12/F/M/20 **[Turn over** 

**5** Lithium reacts with fluorine to form the compound lithium fluoride. Which statement about this reaction is correct? **A** Each fluorine atom gains one electron. **B** Each fluorine atom gains two or more electrons. **C** Each fluorine atom loses one electron. **D** Each fluorine atom loses two or more electrons. 

**6** Ammonia, NH 3 , is a covalent molecule. Which diagram shows the outer shell electron arrangement in a molecule of ammonia? 

### N 

### A 

### H 

### H 

### H N 

### B 

### H 

### H 

### H 

### N 

### C 

### H 

### H 

### H N 

### D 

### H 

### H 

### H 

**7** Which row describes the structure and a use of diamond? 

 structure use A ionic in cutting tools B ionic lubricant C macromolecular in cutting tools D macromolecular lubricant 


© UCLES 2020 0620/12/F/M/20 

**8** Methane, CH 4 , burns in air to form carbon dioxide and water. What is the balanced equation for this reaction? **A** CH 4 (g) + O 2 (g) → CO 2 (g) + 2H 2 O(g) **B** CH 4 (g) + 2O 2 (g) → CO 2 (g) + 2H 2 O(g) **C** CH 4 (g) + 2O 2 (g) → CO 2 (g) + H 2 O(g) **D** CH 4 (g) + 3O 2 (g) → CO 2 (g) + 2H 2 O(g) 

**9** Which statement about electrolysis is correct? **A** Chemical energy is converted to electrical energy. **B** Electrons flow through the electrolyte. **C** Ionic compounds are broken down. **D** Metals are formed at the positive electrode. 

**10** Which energy level diagram shows the reaction that will give out the most energy? 

 energy 

 progress of reaction 

### C 

 reactants 

 products energy 

 progress of reaction 

### D 

 reactants 

 products 

 energy 

 progress of reaction 

### A 

 reactants 

 products 

 energy 

 progress of reaction 

### B 

 reactants 

 products 


© UCLES 2020 0620/12/F/M/20 **[Turn over** 

**11** Which change is a physical change? 

## A Copper(II) carbonate changes colour from green to black when it is heated, and stays black 

 when it cools. B Ethanol reacts with oxygen to form carbon dioxide and water. C Hydrogen peroxide decomposes into water and oxygen when it is boiled. D Ice forms liquid water when it is heated. 

**12** Marble chips (calcium carbonate) react with hydrochloric acid in an exothermic reaction. calcium carbonate + hydrochloric acid → calcium chloride + water + carbon dioxide When excess marble chips are added to dilute hydrochloric acid the rate of the reaction starts off fast, then gets slower until the reaction stops. Why does the reaction rate get slower? **A** The concentration of the hydrochloric acid is decreasing. **B** The concentration of calcium chloride is increasing. **C** The calcium carbonate is completely used up. **D** The temperature of the mixture decreases. 

**13** The diagram shows the change from an anhydrous salt to its hydrated form. 

 anhydrous salt hydrated salt 

 forward reverse Which statement is correct? A The forward reaction requires heat and water. B The forward reaction requires water only. C The reverse reaction requires heat and water. D The reverse reaction requires water only. 


© UCLES 2020 0620/12/F/M/20 

## 14 A violent reaction occurs when a mixture of chromium(III) oxide and aluminium is ignited with a 

 magnesium fuse as shown. 

 crucible 

 magnesium fuse 

 mixture of 

## chromium(III) oxide 

 and aluminium sand The equation for the reaction is shown. 

Cr 2 O 3 + 2A _l_ → 2Cr + A _l_ (^) 2 O 3 Which substance is oxidised in the reaction? **A** aluminium **B** aluminium oxide **C** chromium 

## D chromium(III) oxide 

**15** A farmer’s soil is acidic. Which substance should the farmer add to neutralise the soil? **A** ammonium sulfate **B** calcium oxide **C** hydrochloric acid **D** NPK fertiliser 


© UCLES 2020 0620/12/F/M/20 **[Turn over** 

**16** Three elements, X, Y and Z, are burned in oxygen. The oxides formed are dissolved in water and the pH of the solutions measured. The results are shown. pH of oxide solution X 2.0 Y 14.0 Z 8.0 Which statements are correct? 1 Element X could be sulfur. 2 Element Y could be sodium. 3 Element Z is a non-metal. 4 No metal elements were used. **A** 1 only **B** 1 and 2 **C** 2 and 3 **D** 3 and 4 

**17** The following substances can be reacted together to prepare salts. 

## 1 copper(II) oxide and excess hydrochloric acid 

 2 hydrochloric acid and excess sodium hydroxide 3 hydrochloric acid and excess zinc carbonate In which reactions can the excess reactant be separated from the solution by filtration? A 1 and 2 B 1 and 3 C 2 and 3 D 3 only 


© UCLES 2020 0620/12/F/M/20 

**18** Salt S is dissolved in water and three tests are carried out on the solution. 

 test result 1 aqueous sodiumhydroxide is added green precipitate formed,insoluble in excess sodium hydroxide 2 dilute nitric acid is added no reaction 3 aqueous barium nitrate is added to the acidified solution from test 2 

 white precipitate formed 

 What is the identity of S? 

## A copper(II) chloride 

## B copper(II) sulfate 

## C iron(II) chloride 

## D iron(II) sulfate 

**19** Which statement about the Periodic Table is correct? **A** Most metallic elements are on the left. **B** Elements in the same period have the same number of outer electrons. **C** Elements on the left are usually gases. **D** The relative atomic mass of the elements increases from right to left. 

**20** The diagram shows elements W, X, Y and Z in a section of the Periodic Table. 

### X 

### Y 

### Z 

### W 

 Which statement about the reactivity of the elements is correct? A X is more reactive than Y, and W is more reactive than Z. B X is more reactive than Y, and Z is more reactive than W. C Y is more reactive than X, and W is more reactive than Z. D Y is more reactive than X, and Z is more reactive than W. 


© UCLES 2020 0620/12/F/M/20 **[Turn over** 

**21** Some properties of substances are listed. 1 They conduct electricity. 2 They have low densities. 3 They have high melting points. 4 They are malleable. Which properties are shown by transition metals? **A** 1 and 3 only **B** 1 and 4 only **C** 1, 2 and 3 **D** 1, 3 and 4 

**22** Which statement about the noble gas argon is correct? **A** It burns with a hot flame. **B** It is used in airships because of its low density. **C** It exists as diatomic molecules. **D** It has eight electrons in its outermost shell. 

**23** Sodium is a Group I metal. Which property, that is typical of most metals, is **not** shown by sodium? **A** conductor of heat **B** high melting point **C** malleable **D** shiny 


© UCLES 2020 0620/12/F/M/20 

**24** Manganese, nickel and silver are all metals. Samples of powdered manganese, nickel and silver were placed in separate test-tubes containing dilute hydrochloric acid. The results are shown. 

 hydrogen hydrogen 

 nickel manganese silver What is the order of reactivity of the metals, most reactive to least reactive? A manganese → nickel → silver B manganese → silver → nickel C silver → manganese → nickel D silver → nickel → manganese 

**25** Which statement about aluminium is correct? **A** Aluminium is easy to extract from its ore because it is near the bottom of the reactivity series. **B** Aluminium is formed when aluminium oxide is heated with carbon. **C** Bauxite is an important ore of aluminium. **D** Hematite is an important ore of aluminium. 

**26** Some properties of aluminium are listed. 1 It conducts heat. 2 It has a low density. 3 It is strong. 4 It is resistant to corrosion. Which of these properties make aluminium suitable for making food containers for chilled foodproducts? **A** 1, 2 and 4 **B** 1, 3 and 4 **C** 1 only **D** 4 only 


© UCLES 2020 0620/12/F/M/20 **[Turn over** 

**27** Water is treated at a waterworks to make it fit to drink. What is present in the water when it leaves the waterworks? **A** bacteria only **B** bacteria and insoluble substances **C** chlorine compounds only **D** chlorine compounds and soluble substances 

**28** Sulfur dioxide, carbon monoxide and oxides of nitrogen are common gaseous pollutants found in the air. Which pollutants contribute to acid rain? **A** carbon monoxide and sulfur dioxide **B** oxides of nitrogen and sulfur dioxide **C** oxides of nitrogen only **D** sulfur dioxide only 

**29** Which methods prevent iron from rusting? 

 coating with zinc painting^ 

 washing with salt water A    key B    = prevents rusting C    = does not prevent rusting D    

**30** Fertilisers are mixtures of different compounds used to increase the growth of crops. Which pair of substances contain the three essential elements for plant growth? **A** ammonium nitrate and calcium phosphate **B** ammonium nitrate and potassium chloride **C** ammonium phosphate and potassium chloride **D** potassium nitrate and calcium carbonate 


© UCLES 2020 0620/12/F/M/20 

**31** Which process does **not** add a greenhouse gas to the atmosphere? **A** burning methane **B** decomposition of vegetation **C** polymerisation **D** respiration 

**32** Why is sulfur dioxide used as a food preservative? **A** It is a gas at room temperature. **B** It is used to make sulfuric acid. **C** It kills bacteria. **D** It reacts with alkalis. 

**33** Which statements about lime (calcium oxide) and limestone (calcium carbonate) are correct? 1 Limestone is used in the manufacture of iron. 2 Lime is made by heating limestone. 3 Powdered limestone is heated with clay in the production of cement. 4 Limestone causes soil to be acidic. **A** 1 and 2 only **B** 2 and 3 only **C** 1, 2 and 3 **D** 1, 3 and 4 

**34** The formulae of two organic compounds, P and Q, are shown. P Q 

CH 3 CH 2 CH 2 OH CH 3 CHCHCH (^3) Which type of organic compounds are P and Q? P Q **A** alcohol alkane **B** alcohol alkene **C** carboxylic acid alkane **D** carboxylic acid alkene 


© UCLES 2020 0620/12/F/M/20 **[Turn over** 

**35** Petroleum is an important raw material that is separated into useful products. Which terms describe petroleum and the method used to separate it? description separation method **A** compound cracking **B** compound fractional distillation **C** mixture cracking **D** mixture fractional distillation 

**36** Which type of compound is a member of a homologous series? **A** carbonate **B** carboxylic acid **C** halogen **D** hydroxide 

**37** Which statements about propene are correct? 1 Propene contains only single bonds. 2 Propene decolourises bromine water. 3 Propene is obtained by cracking. 4 Propene is a hydrocarbon. **A** 1 and 4 **B** 2, 3 and 4 **C** 2 and 4 only **D** 4 only 

**38** Which row describes the production of ethanol and its properties? 

 can be made from glucose 

 can be made from ethene 

 is used as a fuel 

 is used as a solvent A     key B     = yes C     = no D     


© UCLES 2020 0620/12/F/M/20 

**39** Which statements about ethanoic acid are correct? 1 It contains a carbon–oxygen double bond. 2 It contains two carbon atoms. 3 It decolourises bromine water. 4 It contains an –OH group. **A** 1 and 2 only **B** 1 and 3 **C** 1, 2 and 4 **D** 2, 3 and 4 

**40** Which polymers are natural polymers? 1 carbohydrates 2 poly(ethene) 3 protein **A** 1, 2 and 3 **B** 1 and 3 only **C** 1 only **D** 3 only 


### BLANK PAGE 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeAssessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University ofCambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2020 0620/12/F/M/20 


© UCLES 2020 0620/12/F/M/20 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements^1 Hhydrogen^1 

(^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Beberyllium 9 **Key** atomic numberatomic symbol name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mgmagnesium 24 19 Kpotassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Srstrontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Gegermanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 (^22) Tititanium (^4840) Zrzirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rfrutherfordium– 23 Vvanadium (^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Crchromium (^5242) Momolybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sgseaborgium– (^25) Mnmanganese (^5543) Tctechnetium– (^75) Rerhenium (^186107) Bhbohrium– (^26) Feiron (^5644) Ruruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Iriridium (^192109) Mtmeitnerium– (^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pdpalladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Dsdarmstadtium– (^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rgroentgenium– (^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cdcadmium (^11280) Hgmercury (^201112) Cncopernicium– 114 F _l_ flerovium– (^116) Lvlivermorium– (^7) Nnitrogen 1415 Pphosphorus (^3133) Asarsenic (^7551) Sbantimony 12283 Bibismuth 209 (^8) Ooxygen 1616 Ssulfur (^3234) Seselenium (^7952) Tetellurium (^12884) Popolonium– (^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Brbromine 8053 I iodine 12785 Atastatine– (^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Scscandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) Lalanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). actinium– (^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium^141 (^91) Paprotactinium 231 (^60) Ndneodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pmpromethium– (^93) Npneptunium– (^62) Smsamarium (^15094) Puplutonium– (^63) Eueuropium (^15295) Amamericium– (^64) Gdgadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bkberkelium– (^66) Dydysprosium 16398 Cfcalifornium– (^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Eseinsteinium– (^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Mdmendelevium– (^70) Ybytterbium (^173102) Nonobelium– (^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lrlawrencium– 


