* 4 4 2 9 8 9 6 3 4 8 * 

 This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. 

 DC (SC/CGW) 153503/3 © UCLES 2018 [Turn over 

## ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/22 

 Paper 2 October/November 2018 2 hours Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all the questions. Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 


© UCLES 2018 0606/22/O/N/18 

 Mathematical Formulae 

## 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

 x 

 b b ac a 

## = 

## − 2 − 4 

## 2 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( _n_ 

# 1 ) a 

_n_ –1 (^) _b_ + 

# ( 

 n 

# 2 ) a 

_n_ –2 (^) _b_ (^2) + … + 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) a 

_n_ – _r_ (^) _br_ (^) + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( _n_ 

# r ) =^ 

 n! ( n – r )! r! 

## 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ 

 sin^2 A + cos^2 A = 1 

 sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A 

 cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC_ 

 a sin A =^ 

 b sin B =^ 

 c sin C 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

 ∆ = 1 2 

 bc sin A 


© UCLES 2018 0606/22/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**1** Solve the inequality ( _x_ 3 )( _x_ + 4 ) 2 _x_ + 13. [3] 

## 2 

##  

## F C 

 There are 105 boys in a year group at a school. Some boys play football ( F ) and some play cricket ( C ). 

- _x_ boys play both football and cricket. 

- The number of boys that play neither game is the same as the number of boys that play both. 

- 40 boys play cricket. 

- The number of boys that only play football is twice the number of boys that only play cricket. 

 Complete the Venn diagram and find the value of x. [5] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/22/O/N/18 

**3** A curve has equation _y_ (^) sin _x_ 2 _x_ 3 =. Find **(i)** (^) _x y_ d d , [3] **(ii)** the equation of the tangent to the curve at the point where _x_ = r 4. [3] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/22/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**4** Solve 

 (i) 2 3 x^ -^1 = 6 , [3] 

 (ii) log ( ) log 

 y 14 1 3 

## 2 

(^3) _y_ 

## + = +. [5] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/22/O/N/18 

**5** Solve the simultaneous equations 

## 4 

(^8 2) _q p_ (^1 11) = + , 3^ _p_^ 9 _q_ 3 1 (^2 5 3) = + 27 

## . [5] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/22/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**6 (a)** A 5-character code is to be formed from the 13 characters shown below. Each character may be used once only in any code. 

 Letters : A, B, C, D, E, F 

 Numbers: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 

 Find the number of different codes in which no two letters follow each other and no two numbers follow each other. [3] 

 (b) A netball team of 7 players is to be chosen from 10 girls. 3 of these 10 girls are sisters. Find the number of different ways the team can be chosen if the team does not contain all 3 sisters. [3] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/22/O/N/18 

**7** Solve the quadratic equation ` 1 3 j _x_^2 + _x_ + ` 1 + 3 j = 0 , giving your answer in the form _a_ + _b_ 3 , where _a_ and _b_ are constants. [6] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/22/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**8 (i)** Show that (^1) -^1 sin _x_ (^1) +^1 sin^ _x_ = 2 tan _x_ sec _x_. [4] **(ii)** Hence solve the equation (^1) 1 sin _x_ (^1) +^1 sin _x_ = cosec _x_ for 0 ° G _x_ G 360 °. [4] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/22/O/N/18 

## 9 

## O B 

## A (4, 4) 

 y = 2√ x 

 y 

 x 

 The diagram shows part of the curve y = 2 x. The normal to the curve at the point A (4, 4) meets the x -axis at the point B. 

 (i) Find the equation of the line AB. [4] 

 (ii) Find the coordinates of B. [1] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/22/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

 (iii) Showing all your working, find the area of the shaded region. [4] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/22/O/N/18 

**10** Two lines are tangents to the curve _y_ = 12 4 _x_ _x_^2. The equation of each tangent is of the form _y_ = 2 _k_ + 1 _kx_ , where _k_ is a constant. 

 (i) Find the two possible values of k. [5] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/22/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

 (ii) Find the coordinates of the point of intersection of the two tangents. [4] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/22/O/N/18 

**11** The functions f and g are defined for real values of _x_ H 1 by 

 f ( ) x = 4 x 3 , 

g ( ) _x_ = (^32) _xx_ +^11. **(i)** Find gf ( ) _x_. [2] **(ii)** Find g -^1 ( ) _x_. [3] **(iii)** Solve fg ( ) _x_ = _x_ 1. [4] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/22/O/N/18 

**12** A plane that can travel at 260 km/h in still air heads due North. A wind with speed 40 km/h from a bearing of 310° blows the plane off course. Find the resultant speed of the plane and its direction as a bearing correct to 1 decimal place. [6] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/22/O/N/18 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

## BLANK PAGE 


