 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. 

 IB15 06_0620_12/2RP © UCLES 2015 [Turn over 

# *8071151377* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/12 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice May/June 2015 

 45 Minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A, B, C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2015 0620/12/M/J/15 

1 The diagram shows a sugar lump in a cup of tea. 

 Which two processes must happen to spread the sugar evenly in the tea? 

 first process second process 

 A diffusion dissolving 

 B dissolving diffusion 

 C dissolving melting 

 D melting diffusion 

2 The results of some tests on a colourless liquid X are shown. 

- Boiling point = 102 °C 

- Universal Indicator turns green 

 What is X? 

 A ethanol 

 B hydrochloric acid 

 C pure water 

 D sodium chloride (salt) solution 

3 The atomic structures of four particles are shown. 

 particle electrons neutrons protons 

 W 8 9 8 

 X 7 9 7 

 Y 8 10 8 

 Z 9 10 9 

 Which two particles are isotopes? 

 A W and X B W and Y C X and Z D Y and Z 


© UCLES 2015 0620/12/M/J/15 [Turn over 

4 Q+^ is an ion of element Q. 

 What has the highest value in the ion? 

 A the nucleon number 

 B the number of electrons 

 C the number of neutrons 

 D the proton number 

5 Which statements comparing the properties of electrons, neutrons and protons are correct? 

 neutrons and protons are both heavier than electrons 

 only electrons and neutrons are charged 

 A   

 B   

 C   

 D   

6 Graphite is a form of carbon. 

 Why can graphite be used as a lubricant? 

 A Graphite contains delocalised electrons which move throughout the structure. 

 B Graphite contains weak covalent bonds so the atoms move easily. 

 C Graphite has a low melting point so it easily turns into a liquid. 

 D Graphite has weak forces of attraction between layers so they can move. 

7 In which compounds are pairs of electrons shared between atoms? 

 1 methane 

 2 lead bromide 

 3 sodium chloride 

 A 1 only B 2 only C 1 and 3 D 1, 2 and 3 


© UCLES 2015 0620/12/M/J/15 

8 A molecule, Z, contains two atoms of oxygen, six atoms of hydrogen and three atoms of carbon. 

 What is the formula of Z? 

 A CH 3 CH 2 CHO 

 B CH 3 COCH 3 

 C C 2 H 5 CO 2 H 

 D C 3 H 6 CO 2 H 

9 Copper and hydrogen can each be formed by electrolysis. 

 At which electrodes are these elements formed? 

 copper hydrogen 

 A anode anode 

 B anode cathode 

 C cathode anode 

 D cathode cathode 

10 The diagram shows the electroplating of a steel object. 

 copper^ steel object 

# copper(II) sulfate solution 

## + – 

 A student made the following statements. 

 1 The object turns a reddish-brown colour. 

 2 The copper sulfate solution changes to a paler blue colour. 

 3 The copper electrode becomes smaller. 

 Which statements are correct? 

 A 1, 2 and 3 B 1 and 2 only C 1 and 3 only D 2 and 3 only 


© UCLES 2015 0620/12/M/J/15 [Turn over 

11 The elements hydrogen and uranium are used as fuels. 

 The compound ethanol is also used as a fuel. 

 Which fuels require oxygen in order to produce heat energy? 

 hydrogen uranium ethanol 

 A    

 B    

 C    

 D    

12 In which equation does the oxidation of the underlined compound occur? 

 A 2CuO + C → CO 2 + Cu 

 B Fe 2 O 3 + 3CO → 2Fe + 3CO 2 

 C 2Mg + O 2 → 2MgO 

D MnO 2 + 4HCl → MnCl 2 + 2H 2 O + Cl (^2) 13 When pink crystals of cobalt(II) chloride are heated, steam is given off and the colour of the solid changes to blue. CoCl 2 .6H 2 O CoCl 2 + 6H 2 O What happens when water is added to the blue solid? colour temperature A changes to pink decreases B changes to pink increases C remains blue decreases D remains blue increases 


© UCLES 2015 0620/12/M/J/15 

14 A simple way of making bread includes 

 1 Mixing flour with a small amount of yeast and some water to make a ‘dough’. 

 2 Leaving the dough in a warm place for the yeast to act on the dough to form carbon dioxide which increases the volume of the dough. 

 Which factors affecting a reaction rate are involved in bread making? 

 temperature use of an enzyme 

 A   

 B   

 C   

 D   

15 Which statement is not correct? 

 A When a base reacts with an ammonium salt, ammonia is given off. 

 B When an acid reacts with a base, neutralisation takes place. 

 C When an acid reacts with a carbonate, carbon dioxide is given off. 

 D When the acidity of a solution increases, the pH increases. 

16 Hydrochloric acid is used to clean metals. 

 The acid reacts with the oxide layer on the surface of the metal, forming a salt and water. 

 Which word describes the metal oxide? 

 A alloy 

 B base 

 C element 

 D indicator 

17 Which method is used to make the salt copper sulfate? 

 A dilute acid + alkali 

 B dilute acid + carbonate 

 C dilute acid + metal 

 D dilute acid + non-metal oxide 


© UCLES 2015 0620/12/M/J/15 [Turn over 

18 Two tests are carried out to identify an aqueous solution of X. 

 test 1 Aqueous sodium hydroxide is added and a blue precipitate is produced. 

 test 2 Dilute nitric acid is added followed by aqueous silver nitrate and a white precipitate is produced. 

 What is X? 

 A copper carbonate 

 B copper chloride 

# C iron(III) carbonate 

# D iron(III) chloride 

19 The positions of four elements in the Periodic Table are shown. 

 Which element does not form a compound with chlorine? 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 

20 Which properties of the element titanium, Ti, can be predicted from its position in the Periodic Table? 

 can be used as a catalyst 

 conducts electricity when solid has low density^ 

 forms coloured compounds 

 A     

 B     

 C     

 D     


© UCLES 2015 0620/12/M/J/15 

21 The table shows some properties of the Group I metals. 

metal (^) melting point / °C hardness reaction with water lithium 181 moderately soft steady effervescence sodium 98 soft vigorous effervescence potassium 63 very soft very vigorous effervescence rubidium??? What are the properties of rubidium? A melts below 63 °C, very soft, reacts explosively with water B melts below 63 °C, very soft, reacts slowly with water C melts above 181 °C, very soft, reacts explosively with water D melts above 181 °C, very soft, reacts slowly with water 22 In the outline of the Periodic Table below, some elements are shown as numbers. 

## 5 6 

## 1 

## 7 

## 2 

## 3 4 

 Which two numbers are metals in the same period? 

 A 1 and 2 B 1 and 7 C 3 and 5 D 5 and 6 


© UCLES 2015 0620/12/M/J/15 [Turn over 

23 Which diagram represents an alloy? 

 A 

## C 

## B 

## D 

24 Which statement is not correct? 

 A Aluminium is used in food containers because of its resistance to corrosion. 

 B Aluminium is used in the manufacture of aircraft because of its strength and low density. 

 C Mild steel is used in car bodies because of its strength and low density. 

 D Stainless steel is used in chemical plant because of its strength and resistance to corrosion. 

25 Which row describes the conditions used to make steel from the iron produced by a blast furnace? 

 calcium oxide (lime) oxygen^ heat 

 A    

 B    

 C    

 D    


© UCLES 2015 0620/12/M/J/15 

26 Samples of five different metals, E, F, G, H and J were reacted with dilute sulfuric acid using the apparatus shown. 

 metal 

 bung 

 gas syringe 

 dilute sulfuric acid 

 The volume of hydrogen gas collected after one minute was measured. 

 The results are shown on the bar chart. 

## E F G 

 metal 

## H J 

## 25 

## 20 

## 15 

## 10 

## 5 

## 0 

 volume of gas collected / cm 3 

 What is the order of reactivity of the metals (most reactive first)? 

 A E, F, G, H, J 

 B G, E, H, F, J 

 C J, F, H, E, G 

 D J, H, G, F, E 

27 The diagram shows stages in producing drinking water. 

 In which tank is chlorine added to the water? 

 reservoir sedimentation tank 

 filtration tank 

 mains supply 

 storage tank 

 anti-bacterial treatment tank 

## A B C D 


© UCLES 2015 0620/12/M/J/15 [Turn over 

28 Which gas is not present in a sample of clean air? 

 A carbon dioxide 

 B chlorine 

 C oxygen 

 D water vapour 

29 Which combination of chemical compounds could be used to produce the fertiliser shown? 

 SUPERGROW 

## N P K 

## 21 : 16 : 8 

 A (NH 4 ) 3 PO 4 , KCl 

 B NH 4 NO 3 , Ca 3 (PO 4 ) 2 

 C NH 4 NO 3 , CO(NH 2 ) 2 

 D NH 4 NO 3 , K 2 SO 4 , (NH 4 ) 2 SO 4 

30 Carbon monoxide is given out from the exhaust of vehicles that burn fossil fuels. 

 Which row shows why carbon monoxide is a pollutant? 

 acidic toxic 

 A no no 

 B no yes 

 C yes no 

 D yes yes 

31 A steel bicycle which had been left outdoors for several months was starting to rust. 

 What would not reduce the rate of corrosion? 

 A Remove the rust and paint the bicycle. 

 B Remove the rust and store the bicycle in a dry shed. 

 C Remove the rust and wipe the bicycle with a clean damp cloth. 

 D Remove the rust and wipe the bicycle with an oily cloth. 


© UCLES 2015 0620/12/M/J/15 

32 Carbon dioxide and methane are ‘greenhouse gases’ which contribute to global warming. 

 Which process does not increase global warming? 

 A burning fossil fuels 

 B decay of organic waste 

 C farming cattle for beef 

 D growing crops such as sugar cane 

33 A zinc compound forms carbon dioxide in two different reactions. 

 1 It is heated strongly. 

 2 It is added to hydrochloric acid. 

 Which type of reaction occurs in 1 and 2? 

## 1 2 

 A combustion neutralisation 

 B combustion oxidation 

 C thermal decomposition neutralisation 

 D thermal decomposition oxidation 

34 Substance X is used to treat industrial waste. 

 industrial waste pH 4 

 treated waste pH 7 

## X 

 What is X and which type of reaction occurs during the treatment? 

 X type of reaction 

 A calcium oxide (lime) neutralisation 

 B calcium oxide (lime) redox 

 C carbon neutralisation 

 D carbon redox 


© UCLES 2015 0620/12/M/J/15 [Turn over 

35 An organic compound has the molecular structure shown. 

## H C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## C C O H 

 Which type of organic compound is this? 

 A alcohol 

 B alkane 

 C alkene 

 D carboxylic acid 

36 Which statement about petroleum is not correct? 

 A It can be separated into useful substances by fractional distillation. 

 B It consists mainly of hydrocarbons. 

 C It is found underground in many parts of the world. 

 D Its main use is for making lubricants and polishes. 

37 The structures of four different organic compounds are shown. 

## H C 

## H 

## H 

## H H C 

## H 

## H H 

## O H C 

## O 

## H 

## H 

## H C 

## O 

## H O H 

 How many different homologous series are represented by these compounds? 

 A 1 B 2 C 3 D 4 


© UCLES 2015 0620/12/M/J/15 

38 The structure of a compound, Y, is shown. 

## H C 

## H 

## H 

## O 

## C O H 

 Which row describes some of the physical properties of Y? 

 colourless characteristic smell dissolves in water 

 A no no no 

 B no no yes 

 C yes yes no 

 D yes yes yes 

39 A hydrocarbon A is cracked to make B and hydrogen. 

 Compound C is formed by the addition polymerisation of B. 

 To which homologous series do A, B and C belong? 

 alkene alkane 

 A A B and C 

 B B A and C 

 C C A and B 

 D – A and C 

40 Which row correctly describes the production of ethanol and its properties? 

 can be made from glucose 

 can be made from ethene 

 is used as a fuel 

 is used as a solvent 

 A     

 B     

 C     

 D     


© UCLES 2015 0620/12/M/J/15 

## BLANK PAGE 


To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

© UCLES 2015 0620/12/M/J/15 

 Group 

(^140) **Ce** Cerium 58 141 **Pr** Praseodymium 59 (^144) **Nd** Neodymium 60 **Pm** Promethium 61 (^150) **Sm** Samarium 62 (^152) **Eu** Europium 63 (^157) **Gd** Gadolinium 64 (^159) **Tb** Terbium 65 (^162) **Dy** Dysprosium 66 (^165) **Ho** Holmium 67 167 **Er** Erbium 68 (^169) **Tm** Thulium 69 (^173) **Yb** Ytterbium 70 (^175) **Lu** Lutetium 71 (^232) **Th** Thorium 90 **Pa** Protactinium 91 238^ **U** Uranium 92 **Np** Neptunium 93 **Pu** Plutonium 94 **Am** Americium 95 **Cm** Curium 96 **Bk** Berkelium 97 **Cf** Californium 98 **Es** Einsteinium 99 **Fm** Fermium 100 **Md** Mendelevium 101 **No** Nobelium 102 **Lr** Lawrencium 103 (^1) **H** Hydrogen 1 (^7) **Li** Lithium 3 (^23) **Na** Sodium 11 (^24) **Mg** Magnesium 12 (^40) **Ca** Calcium 20 (^45) **Sc** Scandium 21 (^48) **Ti** Titanium 22 51 **V** Vanadium 23 (^52) **Cr** Chromium 24 (^55) **Mn** Manganese 25 (^56) **Fe** Iron 26 (^59) **Co** Cobalt 27 (^59) **Ni** Nickel 28 (^64) **Cu** Copper 29 (^65) **Zn** Zinc 30 (^70) **Ga** Gallium 31 (^27) **A** **_l_** Aluminium 13 11 **B** Boron 5 (^12) **C** Carbon 6 14 **N** Nitrogen 7 (^16) **O** Oxygen 8 19 **F** Fluorine 9 (^28) **Si** Silicon 14 31 **P** Phosphorus 15 32 **S** Sulfur 16 35.5 **C** **_l_** Chlorine 17 (^40) **Ar** Argon 18 (^20) **Ne** Neon 10 (^4) **He** Helium 2 (^73) **Ge** Germanium 32 (^75) **As** Arsenic 33 (^79) **Se** Selenium 34 (^80) **Br** Bromine 35 (^84) **Kr** Krypton 36 39 **K** Potassium 19 (^88) **Sr** Strontium 38 89 **Y** Yttrium 39 (^91) **Zr** Zirconium 40 (^93) **Nb** Niobium 41 (^96) **Mo** Molybdenum 42 **Tc** Technetium 43 (^101) **Ru** Ruthenium 44 (^103) **Rh** Rhodium 45 (^106) **Pd** Palladium 46 (^108) **Ag** Silver 47 (^112) **Cd** Cadmium 48 (^115) **In** Indium 49 (^119) **Sn**^ Tin 50 (^122) **Sb** Antimony 51 (^128) **Te** Tellurium 52 127^ **I** Iodine 53 (^131) **Xe** Xenon 54 (^137) **Ba** Barium 56 (^139) **La** Lanthanum 57 * 178 **Hf** Hafnium 72 (^181) **Ta** Tantalum 73 184 **W** Tungsten 74 (^186) **Re** Rhenium 75 (^190) **Os** Osmium 76 (^192) **Ir** Iridium 77 195 **Pt** Platinum 78 (^197) **Au** Gold 79 (^201) **Hg** Mercury 80 204 **T** **_l_** Thallium 81 (^207) **Pb** Lead 82 209 **Bi** Bismuth 83 **Po** Polonium 84 **At** Astatine 85 **Rn** Radon 86 **Fr** Francium 87 (^227) **Ac** Actinium 89 (^9) **Be** Beryllium 4 I^ II^ III IV V^ VI VII 0 (^85) **Rb** Rubidium 37 (^133) **Cs** Caesium 55 (^226) **Ra** Radium 88 The volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). a **X** b a = relative atomic mass= atomic symbol **X**^ b = proton (atomic) number *58-71 Lanthanoid series90-103 Actinoid seriesKey **DATA SHEET The Periodic Table of the Elements** 


