 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all questions. Electronic calculators may be used. You may lose marks if you do not show your working or if you do not use appropriate units. Practical notes are provided on page 8. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. 

 CHEMISTRY 0620/52 Paper 5 Practical Test May/June 2015 1 hour 15 minutes Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: As listed in the Confidential Instructions 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certifi cate of Secondary Education 

 This document consists of 8 printed pages and 1 insert. 

 [Turn over 

 IB15 06_0620_52/3RP © UCLES 2015 

# *6194711301* 

 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 For Examiner’s Use 

 Total 


© UCLES 2015 0620/52/M/J/15 

**1** You are going to investigate the rate of reaction between hydrochloric acid and aqueous sodium thiosulfate. When these chemicals react they form a precipitate which makes the solution go cloudy. The formation of this precipitate can be used to show how fast the reaction proceeds. 

 Read all the instructions below carefully before starting the experiments. 

 Instructions You are going to carry out fi ve experiments using the apparatus shown below. 

 aqueous sodium thiosulfate 

 eye 

 10 cm 3 of hydrochloric acid 

 250 cm^3 conical flask 

 printed insert printed text 

 (a) Experiment 1 

 Use the large measuring cylinder to pour 50 cm 3 of aqueous sodium thiosulfate into a conical fl ask. Place the conical fl ask on the printed insert provided. Fill the small measuring cylinder with 10 cm 3 of the hydrochloric acid provided. Add the acid to the solution in the conical flask and immediately start your timer and swirl the mixture. Measure the time taken for the printed text to disappear from view. Record the time in the table. Pour the solution away and rinse the conical fl ask with distilled water. 

 (b) Experiment 2 

 Use the large measuring cylinder to pour 40 cm 3 of aqueous sodium thiosulfate into the conical fl ask, followed by 10 cm 3 of distilled water. Place the conical fl ask on the printed insert. Fill the small measuring cylinder with 10 cm 3 of the hydrochloric acid provided. Add the acid to the solution in the fl ask, start your timer and swirl the mixture. Measure the time taken for the printed text to disappear from view. Record the time in the table. 


© UCLES 2015 0620/52/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

 (c) Experiment 3 

 Repeat Experiment 2 using 35 cm 3 of aqueous sodium thiosulfate and 15 cm 3 of distilled water. Record the time in the table. 

 (d) Experiment 4 

 Repeat Experiment 2 using 30 cm 3 of aqueous sodium thiosulfate and 20 cm 3 of distilled water. Record the time in the table. 

 (e) Experiment 5 

 Repeat Experiment 2 using 20 cm 3 of aqueous sodium thiosulfate and 30 cm 3 of distilled water. Record the time in the table. 

 (f) Complete the table. 

 Experiment 

 volume of aqueous sodium thiosulfate / cm 3 

 volume of distilled water / cm^3 

 time for printed text to disappear / s 

 1 

## 2 

## 3 

## 4 

## 5 

## [4] 


© UCLES 2015 0620/52/M/J/15 

 (g) Plot the results you have obtained on the grid and draw a smooth line graph. 

## 0 

## 0 

## 10 20 30 

 volume of aqueous sodium thiosulfate / cm^3 

time for printed text to disappear / s 

## 40 50 60 

## [4] 


© UCLES 2015 0620/52/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

 (h) Describe the appearance of the solution in the conical fl ask at the end of each experiment. 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

 (i) (i) From your graph , deduce the time for the printed text to disappear if the experiment was repeated using 25 cm 3 of aqueous sodium thiosulfate and 25 cm 3 of distilled water. Show clearly on the grid how you worked out your answer. 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [3] 

 (ii) Sketch on the grid the curve you would expect if the experiments were repeated at a lower temperature. Label this curve. [1] 

 (j) (i) In which experiment was the rate of reaction greatest? 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [1] 

 (ii) Explain why the rate of reaction was greatest in this experiment. 

 ............................................................................................................................................. 

 ............................................................................................................................................. 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [1] 

 (k) A student carried out a sixth experiment using 60 cm 3 of aqueous sodium thiosulfate. 

 Why would this not be an appropriate volume to use in this series of experiments? 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [2] 

 (l) Suggest and explain the effect of 

 (i) using a burette to measure the volume of the hydrochloric acid, 

 ............................................................................................................................................. 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [2] 

 (ii) using a 100 cm 3 conical flask. 

 ............................................................................................................................................. 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [2] 

 [Total: 21] 


© UCLES 2015 0620/52/M/J/15 

**2** You are provided with a mixture of two solids, **J** and **K** , which are both salts. **J** is water soluble and **K** is insoluble. Carry out the following tests on the mixture, recording all of your observations in the table. Conclusions must **not** be written in the table. 

 tests observations 

 (a) Describe the appearance of the mixture. ................................................................ [1] 

 Add 10 cm^3 of distilled water to the mixture. Stopper the boiling tube and shake the mixture for a minute. Filter the mixture and keep the residue for tests later. 

 tests on the filtrate 

 Divide the solution into three equal portions in three test-tubes. 

 (b) To the first portion of the solution, add about 1 cm^3 of aqueous sodium hydroxide. Heat the mixture gently and test any gas evolved with damp pH indicator paper. 

## ...................................................................... 

## ................................................................ [3] 

 (c) To the second portion of the solution, add a few drops of dilute nitric acid and about 1 cm 3 of aqueous silver nitrate solution. ................................................................ [2] 

 (d) To the third portion of the solution, add about 1 cm^3 of hydrogen peroxide solution. 

 Add a spatula measure of starch to the mixture. 

 Test the gas given off with a splint. 

## ...................................................................... 

## ...................................................................... 

## ................................................................ [5] 

 tests on the residue 

 Use a spatula to transfer some of the residue into a test-tube. 

 (e) Add about 3 cm 3 of dilute hydrochloric acid to the test-tube. Test the gas given off. 

 To the solution add about 1 cm 3 of dilute sulfuric acid. 

## ...................................................................... 

## ................................................................ [3] 

## ................................................................ [1] 


© UCLES 2015 0620/52/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

 (f) What conclusions can you draw about solid J? 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [2] 

 (g) What conclusions can you draw about solid K? 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [2] 

 [Total: 19] 


© UCLES 2015 0620/52/M/J/15 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

## NOTES FOR USE IN QUALITATIVE ANALYSIS 

**Test for anions** 

 anion test test result carbonate (CO 3 2–^ ) add dilute acid effervescence, carbon dioxide produced chloride (C l –^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify with dilute nitric acid, then add aqueous silver nitrate 

 white ppt. 

 iodide (I–^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify with dilute nitric acid, then add aqueous silver nitrate 

 yellow ppt. 

 nitrate (NO 3 –^ ) [in solution] 

 add aqueous sodium hydroxide then aluminium foil; warm carefully 

 ammonia produced 

 sulfate (SO 4 2–^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify with dilute nitric acid, then aqueous barium nitrate 

 white ppt. 

**Test for aqueous cations** 

 cation effect of aqueous sodium hydroxide effect of aqueous ammonia 

 aluminium (A l 3+^ ) 

 white ppt., soluble in excess giving a colourless solution 

 white ppt., insoluble in excess 

 ammonium (NH 4 +) ammonia produced on warming – 

 calcium (Ca 2+^ ) white ppt., insoluble in excess no ppt., or very slight white ppt. 

 copper (Cu 2+^ ) light blue ppt., insoluble in excess light blue ppt., soluble in excess giving a dark blue solution 

# iron(II) (Fe2+^ ) green ppt., insoluble in excess green ppt., insoluble in excess 

# iron(III) (Fe3+^ ) red-brown ppt., insoluble in excess red-brown ppt., insoluble in excess 

 zinc (Zn 2+^ ) white ppt., soluble in excess giving a colourless solution 

 white ppt., soluble in excess giving a colourless solution 

**Test for gases** 

 gas test and test results 

 ammonia (NH 3 ) turns damp red litmus paper blue 

 carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) turns limewater milky 

chlorine (C _l_ (^) 2 ) bleaches damp litmus paper hydrogen (H 2 ) ‘pops’ with a lighted splint oxygen (O 2 ) relights a glowing splint 


