 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 16 printed pages. IB15 06_0620_11/3RP© UCLES 2015 [Turn over 

# *4319041575* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/11 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice May/June 2015 Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet^ 45 Minutes Soft clean eraserSoft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid.Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you.DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

There areanswers A (^) ,forty B, C questions on this paper. Answerand D. all questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet.A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2015 0620/11/M/J/15 

1 The changes that occur when a substance changes state are shown below. W X 

solid (^) Z liquid (^) Y gas Which process, W, X, Y or Z, is occurring in the following four situations? 1 Butter melts on a warm day. 2 Water condenses on a cold surface. 3 The volume of liquid ethanol in an open beaker reduces. 4 Ice forms inside a freezer. 1 2 3 4 A W X Y Z B W Y X Z C X Y Z W D X Z Y W 2 A student uses the apparatus shown in the diagram below to measure the volume of carbon dioxidehydrochloric acid. gas made when different masses of marble chips are added to 25 cm^3 of dilute marble chips bung gas syringe 25 cm^3 dilute hydrochloric acid Which other items of apparatus are needed? A funnel and balance B funnel and stopwatch C measuring cylinder and balance D measuring cylinder and stopwatch 


© UCLES 2015 0620/11/M/J/15 [Turn over 

3 Atoms contain electrons, neutrons and protons. What is the definition of nucleon number? A the number of neutrons in the nucleus of an atom B the number of protons in the nucleus of an atom C the total number of neutrons and protons in the nucleus of an atom D the total number of particles in an atom 

4 The diagram shows the atomic structure of an element X. 

 p 

 p p p 

p (^) n n n n (^) n e e e e proton key e electron n neutron What is X? A aluminium B beryllium C boron D fluorine 5 Which statements comparing the properties of electrons, neutrons and protons are correct? both heavier than electronsneutrons and protons are neutrons are chargedonly electrons and A   B   C   D   


© UCLES 2015 0620/11/M/J/15 

6 Rescuers are drilling through fallen rock in order to rescue some men trapped in a cave. The drillneeds lubricating from time to time. 

 The following statements were made about the materials used for the drill tip and the lubricantand the reasons for their use. 

 1 Diamond was used for the drill tip as it does not conduct electricity. 2 Diamond was used for the drill tip as it is very hard. 3 Graphite was used as the lubricant as it conducts electricity. 4 Graphite was used as the lubricant as it is soft and flaky. Which statements are correct? A 1 and 3 B 1 and 4 C 2 and 3 D 2 and 4 

7 In which compounds are pairs of electrons shared between atoms? 1 methane 2 lead bromide 3 sodium chloride A 1 only B 2 only C 1 and 3 D 1, 2 and 3 

8 What is the relative formula mass, Mr, of CaCO 3? A 50 B 68 C 100 D 204 

9 Copper and hydrogen can each be formed by electrolysis. At which electrodes are these elements formed? copper hydrogen A anode anode B anode cathode C cathode anode D cathode cathode 


© UCLES 2015 0620/11/M/J/15 [Turn over 

10 The diagram shows a failed attempt to copper-plate a pan. 

 pan 

 copper sulfate solution 

 copper cathode 

## 3 V 

## – + 

 Which action will plate the pan with copper? A cooling the copper sulfate solution in an ice bath B heating the copper sulfate solution to boiling point C increasing the voltage from 3 V to 6 V D making the pan the cathode and the copper the anode 


© UCLES 2015 0620/11/M/J/15 

11 The diagrams show four chemical reactions. Which reaction is endothermic? **A B** 

## C D 

 addition of water to calcium oxide combustion of natural gas 

 thermal decomposition of limestone reaction of acid with alkali 

 water 

 steam 

 calcium oxide 

 natural gas 

 flame 

 final temperature initial temperature 

 acid 

 alkali heat 


© UCLES 2015 0620/11/M/J/15 [Turn over 

12 Powdered marble reacts with hydrochloric acid using the apparatus shown. The gas syringe fills in 36 seconds. 

 powdered marble 

 gas syringe 

 gas 

 hydrochloric acid 

 The experiment is repeated using marble chips in place of powdered marble. How long does it take to fill the gas syringe in this experiment? A 9 seconds B 18 seconds C 36 seconds D 72 seconds 

13 When pink crystals of cobalt(II) chloride are heated, steam is given off and the colour of the solid changes to blue. CoCl 2 .6H 2 O CoCl 2 + 6H 2 O What happens when water is added to the blue solid? colour temperature A changes to pink decreases B changes to pink increases C remains blue decreases D remains blue increases 


© UCLES 2015 0620/11/M/J/15 

# 14 In which change is chromium(II) oxide, CrO, reduced? 

 CrO 

CrO (^3) Cr 2 O 3 Cr CrO (^2) 

## B 

## D 

## A 

## C 

15 The table shows the pH of four aqueous solutions, W, X, Y and Z. 

 substance pH W 7 X 9 Y 2 Z 5 Universal Indicator is added to each solution. Which row shows the colour of each solution after the indicator is added? W X Y Z A blue green orange red B green blue red orange C orange red blue green D red orange green blue 

16 Hydrochloric acid is used to clean metals. The acid reacts with the oxide layer on the surface of the metal, forming a salt and water. Which word describes the metal oxide? A alloy B base C element D indicator 


© UCLES 2015 0620/11/M/J/15 [Turn over 

17 Four steps to prepare a salt from an excess of a solid base and an acid are listed. 1 crystallisation 2 evaporation 3 filtration 4 neutralisation In which order are the steps carried out? A 2 → 3 → 4 → 1 B 3 → 1 → 2 → 4 C 4 → 2 → 1 → 3 D 4 → 3 → 2 → 1 

18 Which two compounds give a white precipitate when their aqueous solutions are mixed? A silver nitrate and sodium chloride B silver nitrate and sodium iodide 

# C sodium hydroxide and copper(II) sulfate 

# D sodium hydroxide and iron(II) chloride 

19 Which element is in the same group of the Periodic Table as lithium? 

 electrical conductivity density in g / cm^3 A high 0.97 B high 8.93 C low 0.07 D low 3.12 

20 Which properties of the element titanium, Ti, can be predicted from its position in the PeriodicTable? 

 as a catalystcan be used conducts electricitywhen solid has low density^ forms colouredcompounds A     B     C     D     


© UCLES 2015 0620/11/M/J/15 

21 The following statements are about elements in the Periodic Table. 1 Their atoms have a full outer shell of electrons. 2 They form basic oxides. 3 They are found in Group 0. 4 They are present in small quantities in the air. Which statements are correct for the noble gases? A 1, 2 and 3 B 1, 2 and 4 C 1, 3 and 4 D 2, 3 and 4 

22 In the outline of the Periodic Table below, some elements are shown as numbers. 

## 5 6 

## 1 

## 7 

## 2 

## 3 4 

 Which two numbers are metals in the same period? A 1 and 2 B 1 and 7 C 3 and 5 D 5 and 6 

23 Solder is an alloy of lead and tin. It is used for joining pieces of metal. 

 metal 

 heated solder 

 molten solder 

 Which statement about solder is correct? A It can be represented by a chemical formula. B It contains a mixture of lead and tin. C It contains lead and tin chemically combined. D It has a higher melting point than lead or tin. 


© UCLES 2015 0620/11/M/J/15 [Turn over 

24 What is a major use of aluminium? A making brass B making cutlery C making electrical wiring D making food containers 

25 Which row describes the conditions used to make steel from the iron produced by a blast furnace? calcium oxide (lime) oxygen^ heat A    B    C    D    

26 W, X, Y and Z are four metals. Some properties of these metals are listed below. 1 Only W and Z can be extracted by reduction of their oxides with carbon. 2 Only X will react with cold water. 3 Only Z can be found ‘native’ (not combined with any other element). What is the correct order of these metals in the reactivity series (most reactive first)? A X, W, Y, Z B X, Y, W, Z C Z, W, Y, X D Z, Y, W, X 

27 The diagram shows stages in producing drinking water. In which tank is chlorine added to the water? 

 reservoir sedimentationtank filtrationtank treatment tankanti-bacterial storagetank supplymains 

## A B C D 

28 Which gas is not found in clean air? A carbon dioxide B carbon monoxide C nitrogen D oxygen 


© UCLES 2015 0620/11/M/J/15 

29 Which combination of chemical compounds could be used to produce the fertiliser shown? 

 SUPERGROW 

## N P K 

## 21 : 16 : 8 

 A (NH 4 ) 3 PO 4 , KCl B NH 4 NO 3 , Ca 3 (PO 4 ) 2 C NH 4 NO 3 , CO(NH 2 ) 2 D NH 4 NO 3 , K 2 SO 4 , (NH 4 ) 2 SO 4 

30 The pollutants released into the air from car exhausts and some power stations include oxides of the type XO and YO2. What are X and Y? X Y A carbon only nitrogen only B carbon only nitrogen and sulfur only C carbon and nitrogen carbon and nitrogen only D carbon and nitrogen carbon, nitrogen and sulfur 

31 Which statement about rusting is not correct? A Only oxygen is needed for rusting. B Painting can stop iron gates rusting. 

# C Rust is hydrated iron(III) oxide. 

 D Water and oxygen are both needed for rusting. 

32 Carbon dioxide and methane are ‘greenhouse gases’ which contribute to global warming. Which process does not increase global warming? A burning fossil fuels B decay of organic waste C farming cattle for beef D growing crops such as sugar cane 


© UCLES 2015 0620/11/M/J/15 [Turn over 

33 These statements are about a gas. 1 It is produced by thermal decomposition of a carbonate. 2 It is produced by the fermentation of glucose. 3 It makes up 1% of unpolluted air. 4 It is produced during the production of steel from iron. Which statements are correct for carbon dioxide? A 1 and 2 only B 1, 2 and 3 C 1, 2 and 4 D 1, 3 and 4 

34 The diagram represents a lime kiln. 

 air in 

 fuel in fuel in 

 air in X 

 waste gases 

 limestone 

 lime kiln 

 What leaves the furnace at X? A calcium carbonate B calcium hydroxide C calcium oxide D calcium sulfate 


© UCLES 2015 0620/11/M/J/15 

35 The structures of four organic compounds are shown. 

 C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H C 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## C C 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## O H 

## H 

## H 

 Which statement is not correct? A Only one of the compounds is an alcohol. B Only one of the compounds is an alkane. C Only one of the compounds is unsaturated. D Only three of the compounds are hydrocarbons. 

36 Which statement about petroleum is not correct? A It can be separated into useful substances by fractional distillation. B It consists mainly of hydrocarbons. C It is found underground in many parts of the world. D Its main use is for making lubricants and polishes. 

37 Which statement about alkane molecules is correct? A They burn in oxygen. B They contain carbon, hydrogen and oxygen atoms. C They contain double bonds. D They contain ionic bonds. 

38 Which statements are correct for ethanoic acid? 1 It contains a carbon-oxygen double bond. 2 It contains two carbon atoms. 3 It decolourises bromine water. 4 It contains an –OH group. A 1 and 2 only B 1 and 3 C 1, 2 and 4 D 2, 3 and 4 


© UCLES 2015 0620/11/M/J/15 

39 A hydrocarbon A is cracked to make B and hydrogen. Compound C is formed by the addition polymerisation of B. To which homologous series do A, B and C belong? alkene alkane A A B and C B B A and C C C A and B D – A and C 

40 By which of the following methods is ethanol formed? 1 fractional distillation of petroleum 2 fermentation 3 catalytic addition of steam to ethene A 1 and 2 only B 1 and 3 only C 2 and 3 only D 1, 2 and 3 


To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeInternational Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. © UCLES 2015 0620/11/M/J/15 

 Group 

(^140) **Ce** Cerium 58 141 **Pr** Praseodymium 59 (^144) **Nd** Neodymium 60 **Pm** Promethium 61 (^150) **Sm** Samarium 62 (^152) **Eu** Europium 63 (^157) **Gd** Gadolinium 64 (^159) **Tb** Terbium 65 (^162) **Dy** Dysprosium 66 (^165) **Ho** Holmium 67 167 **Er** Erbium 68 (^169) **Tm** Thulium 69 (^173) **Yb** Ytterbium 70 (^175) **Lu** Lutetium 71 (^232) **Th** Thorium 90 **Pa** Protactinium 91 238^ **U** Uranium 92 **Np** Neptunium 93 **Pu** Plutonium 94 **Am** Americium 95 **Cm** Curium 96 **Bk** Berkelium 97 **Cf** Californium 98 **Es** Einsteinium 99 **Fm** Fermium 100 **Md** Mendelevium 101 **No** Nobelium 102 **Lr** Lawrencium 103 (^1) **H** Hydrogen 1 (^7) **Li** Lithium 3 23^ **Na**^ Sodium 11 (^24) **Mg** Magnesium 1240 **Ca** Calcium 20 (^45) **Sc** Scandium 21 (^48) **Ti** Titanium 22 51 **V** Vanadium 23 (^52) **Cr** Chromium 24 (^55) **Mn** Manganese 25 (^56) **Fe** Iron 26 (^59) **Co** Cobalt 27 (^59) **Ni** Nickel 28 (^64) **Cu** Copper 29 (^65) **Zn** Zinc 30 11 **B** Boron 5 27 **A** **_l_** Aluminium 1370 **Ga** Gallium 31 (^12) **C** Carbon 6 14 **N** Nitrogen 7 (^16) **O** Oxygen 8 19 **F** Fluorine 9 (^28) **Si** Silicon 14 31 **P** Phosphorus 15 32 **S** Sulfur 16 35.5 **C** **_l_** Chlorine 17 (^40) **Ar** Argon 18 (^20) **Ne** Neon 10 (^4) **He** Helium 2 (^73) **Ge** Germanium 32 (^75) **As** Arsenic 33 (^79) **Se** Selenium 34 (^80) **Br** Bromine 35 (^84) **Kr** Krypton 36 39 **K** Potassium 19 (^88) **Sr** Strontium 38 89 **Y** Yttrium 39 (^91) **Zr** Zirconium 40 (^93) **Nb** Niobium 41 (^96) **Mo** Molybdenum 42 **Tc** Technetium 43 (^101) **Ru** Ruthenium 44 (^103) **Rh** Rhodium 45 (^106) **Pd** Palladium 46 (^108) **Ag** Silver 47 (^112) **Cd** Cadmium 48 (^115) **In** Indium 49 (^119) **Sn**^ Tin 50 (^122) **Sb** Antimony 51 (^128) **Te** Tellurium 52 127^ **I** Iodine 53 (^131) **Xe** Xenon 54 (^137) **Ba** Barium 56 (^139) **La** Lanthanum 57 * 178 **Hf** Hafnium 72 (^181) **Ta** Tantalum 73 184 **W** Tungsten 74 (^186) **Re** Rhenium 75 (^190) **Os** Osmium 76 (^192) **Ir** Iridium 77 195 **Pt** Platinum 78 (^197) **Au** Gold 79 (^201) **Hg** Mercury 80 204 **T** **_l_** Thallium 81 (^207) **Pb** Lead 82 209 **Bi** Bismuth 83 **Po** Polonium 84 **At** Astatine 85 **Rn** Radon 86 **Fr** Francium 87 (^227) **Ac** Actinium 89 (^9) **Be** Beryllium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ 0 (^85) **Rb** Rubidium 37133 **Cs** Caesium 55 (^226) **Ra** Radium 88 The volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). a **X** b a = relative atomic mass= atomic symbol **X**^ b = proton (atomic) number *58-71 Lanthanoid series90-103 Actinoid seriesKey **DATA SHEET The Periodic Table of the Elements** 


