 This document consists of 16 printed pages. 

 DC (CW/SG) 99296/4 © UCLES 2015 [Turn over 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

* 0 9 8 5 1 4 8 7 5 5 * 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/12 Paper 1 February/March 2015 2 hours Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all the questions. Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 


© UCLES 2015 0606/12/F/M/15 

 Mathematical Formulae 

## 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

 x 

 b b ac a 

 = 

 − 2 − 4 2 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( _n_ 

# 1 ) a 

_n_ –1 (^) _b_ + 

# ( 

 n 

# 2 ) a 

_n_ –2 (^) _b_ (^2) + … + 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) a 

_n_ – _r_ (^) _br_ (^) + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( _n_ 

# r ) =^ 

 n! ( n – r )! r! 

## 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ 

 sin 2 A + cos^2 A = 1 

 sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A 

 cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC_ 

 a sin A =^ 

 b sin B =^ 

 c sin C 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

 ∆ = 

## 1 

 2 bc^ sin^ A 


© UCLES 2015 0606/12/F/M/15 **[Turn over** 

**1** A sports club has members who play a variety of sports. Sets _C_ , _F_ and _T_ are such that 

 C = { members who play cricket}, F = { members who play football}, T = { members who play tennis}. 

 Describe the following in words. 

 (i) C , F [1] 

 (ii) T l [1] 

 (iii) F + T = Q [1] 

 (iv) n ( C + T ) = 10 [1] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/12/F/M/15 

**2** Find the values of _k_ for which the line _y_ = _kx_ 3 does not meet the curve _y_ = 2 _x_^2 3 _x_ + _k_. [5] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/12/F/M/15 **[Turn over** 

**3 (i)** On the axes below sketch the graph of _y_ = 4 5 _x_ , stating the coordinates of the points where the graph meets the coordinate axes. [3] 

 y 

 O x 

 (ii) Solve 4 5 x = 9. [3] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/12/F/M/15 

**4 (i)** Write down, in ascending powers of _x_ , the first 3 terms in the expansion of ( 3 + 2 _x_ )^6. Give each term in its simplest form. [3] 

 (ii) Hence find the coefficient of x^2 in the expansion of ( 2 x ) ( 3 + 2 x )^6. [2] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/12/F/M/15 **[Turn over** 

## 5 

 (2, 1) 

 (3, 5) 

 e y 

_O_ (^) _x_ Variables _x_ and _y_ are such that when e _y_^ is plotted against _x_ a straight line graph is obtained. The diagram shows this straight line graph which passes through the points (2, 1) and (3, 5). **(i)** Express _y_ in terms of _x_. [4] **(ii)** State the values of _x_ for which _y_ exists. [1] **(iii)** Find the value of _x_ when _y_ = ln 6. [1] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/12/F/M/15 

**6 (i)** Given that _y_ = tan _x_^2 _x_ , find (^) _x y_ d d 

. [3] 

 (ii) Hence find the equation of the normal to the curve y tan x = 2 x 

at the point where _x_ (^) 8 _r_ =. [3] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/12/F/M/15 **[Turn over** 

**7** The polynomial p ( ) _x_ = _ax_^3 + _bx_^2 3 _x_ 4 has a factor of 2 _x_ 1 and leaves a remainder of 10 when divided by _x_ + 2. 

 (i) Show that a = 10 and find the value of b. [4] 

 (ii) Given that p ( ) x = ( 2 x 1 ) ( rx^2 + sx + t ), find the value of each of the integers r , s and t. [2] 

 (iii) Hence find the exact solutions of p ( ) x = 0. [3] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/12/F/M/15 

**8 (a)** A function f is such that f ( ) _i_ = sin 2 _i_ for 0 G _i_ G 2 _r_^. 

 (i) Write down the range of f. [1] 

 (ii) Write down a suitable restricted domain for f such that f -^1 exists. [1] 

 (b) Functions g and h are such that 

 g ( ) x = 2 + 4 ln x for x 2 0 , h ( ) x = x^2 + 4 for x 2 0. 

 (i) Find g -^1 , stating its domain and its range. [4] 

 (ii) Solve gh ( ) x = 10. [3] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/12/F/M/15 **[Turn over** 

 (iii) Solve g l ( ) x =hl ( ) x. [3] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/12/F/M/15 

## 9 

 x cm 

 x cm 

 y cm 

 x cm 

 The diagram shows an empty container in the form of an open triangular prism. The triangular faces are equilateral with a side of x cm and the length of each rectangular face is y cm. The container is made from thin sheet metal. When full, the container holds 200 3 cm^3. 

 (i) Show that A cm^2 , the total area of the thin sheet metal used, is given by A x x 2 

## = 3 2 + 1600. [5] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/12/F/M/15 **[Turn over** 

 (ii) Given that x and y can vary, find the stationary value of A and determine its nature. [6] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/12/F/M/15 

**10 Do not use a calculator in this question.** 

 A 

 B C 

 θ 

 ( 1 + 2 5 ) cm 

 ( 2 + 5 ) cm 

 The diagram shows triangle ABC which is right-angled at the point B. The side AB = ^ 1 + 2 5 h^ cm and the side BC = ^ 2 + 5 h^ cm. Angle BCA = i. 

 (i) Find tan i in the form a + b 5 , where a and b are integers to be found. [3] 

 (ii) Hence find sec 2 i in the form c + d 5 , where c and d are integers to be found. [3] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/12/F/M/15 **[Turn over** 

**11 (a) (i)** Show that (^) cotcosec _x_ + tan^ _x_^ _x_ = cos _x_. [3] **(ii)** Hence solve. cot tan cosec _y y y_ 3 3 

## 3 

## 0 5 

## + 

 = for 0 G y G r radians, giving your answers in terms of r. [3] 

 Question 11(b) is printed on the next page. 


© UCLES 2015 0606/12/F/M/15 

 (b) Solve 2 sin z + 8 cos^2 z = 5 for 0 ° 1 z 1 360 °. [4] 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 


