 This document consists of 16 printed pages. 

 DC (AC/FD) 99297/4 © UCLES 2015 [Turn over 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

* 8 4 7 5 1 4 8 9 1 2 * 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/22 Paper 2 February/March 2015 2 hours Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all the questions. Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 


© UCLES 2015 0606/22/F/M/15 

 Mathematical Formulae 

## 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

 x 

 b b ac a 

 = 

 − 2 − 4 2 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( _n_ 

# 1 ) a 

_n_ –1 (^) _b_ + 

# ( 

 n 

# 2 ) a 

_n_ –2 (^) _b_ (^2) + … + 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) a 

_n_ – _r_ (^) _br_ (^) + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( _n_ 

# r )^ =^ 

 n! ( n – r )! r! 

## 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ 

 sin 2 A + cos^2 A = 1 

 sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A 

 cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC_ 

 a sin A =^ 

 b sin B =^ 

 c sin C 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

 ∆ = 

## 1 

 2 bc^ sin^ A 


© UCLES 2015 0606/22/F/M/15 **[Turn over** 

**1 (i)** State the amplitude of 4 cos _x_ 3. [1] 

 (ii) State the period of 4 cos x 3. [1] 

 (iii) The function f is defined, for 0 c G x G 360 c, by f ( ) x = 4 cos x 3. Sketch the graph of y = f( ) x on the axes below. [2] 

(^0) 90° 5 _y x_ –5 180° 270° 360° 


© UCLES 2015 0606/22/F/M/15 

**2 (a)** Jean has nine different flags. 

 (i) Find the number of different ways in which Jean can choose three flags from her nine flags. [1] 

 (ii) Jean has five flagpoles in a row. She puts one of her nine flags on each flagpole. Calculate the number of different five-flag arrangements she can make. [1] 

 (b) The six digits of the number 738925 are rearranged so that the resulting six-digit number is even. Find the number of different ways in which this can be done. [2] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/22/F/M/15 **[Turn over** 

**3** Solve the simultaneous equations 

## . 

## , 

 y x 

 x xy y 2 4 

## 3 2 2 2 16 

## = 

## + = 

## [5] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/22/F/M/15 

**4 (i)** Differentiate sin _x_ cos _x_ with respect to _x_ , giving your answer in terms of sin _x_. [3] 

**(ii)** Hence find (^) y sin 2 _x x_ d. [3] 


 © UCLES 2015 0606/22/F/M/15 [Turn over 

**5** The position vectors of the points _A_ and _B_ relative to an origin _O_ are −2 **i** + 17 **j** and 6 **i** + 2 **j** respectively. 

 (i) Find the vector AB. [1] 

 (ii) Find the unit vector in the direction of AB. [2] 

 (iii) The position vector of the point C relative to the origin O is such that OC = OA + mOB , where m is a constant. Given that C lies on the x -axis, find the vector OC. [3] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/22/F/M/15 

## 6 

 B 

 O C 

 θ rad 

 20 cm 

 A 

 AOB is a sector of a circle with centre O and radius 20 cm. Angle AOB = θ radians. AOC is a straight line and triangle OBC is isosceles with OB = OC. 

 (i) Given that the length of the arc AB is 15π cm, find the exact value of θ. [2] 

 (ii) Find the area of the shaded region. [4] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/22/F/M/15 **[Turn over** 

**7** It is given that **A** = 

## 1 

## 3 

## 5 

## 10 

## 

## 

## J 

## L 

## KK 

## N 

## P 

 OO and B = 3 4 

## 5 

## 10 

## J 

## L 

## KK 

## N 

## P 

## OO. 

 (i) Find A^2 + B. [2] 

 (ii) Find det B. [1] 

 (iii) Find the inverse matrix, B −1. [2] 

 (iv) Find the matrix X , given that BX = A. [2] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/22/F/M/15 

**8 Solutions to this question by accurate drawing will not be accepted.** 

 The points A and B have coordinates (2, −1) and (6, 5) respectively. 

 (i) Find the equation of the perpendicular bisector of AB , giving your answer in the form ax + by = c , where a , b and c are integers. [4] 

 The point C has coordinates (10, −2). 

 (ii) Find the equation of the line through C which is parallel to AB. [2] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/22/F/M/15 **[Turn over** 

 (iii) Calculate the length of BC. [2] 

 (iv) Show that triangle ABC is isosceles. [1] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/22/F/M/15 

## 9 

 y =^4 (2 x + 1)^2 

 + 2 x 

 y 

 A 

 O 

 y = 4 x 

 x 

 The diagram shows part of the curve ( ) 

 y x 

 x 2 1 

(^4 2) = (^) + 2 + and the line _y_ = 4 _x_. **(i)** Find the coordinates of _A_ , the stationary point of the curve. [5] **(ii)** Verify that _A_ is also the point of intersection of the curve ( ) _y x x_ 2 1 (^4 2) = (^) + 2 + and the line _y_ = 4 _x_. [1] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/22/F/M/15 **[Turn over** 

 (iii) Without using a calculator , find the area of the shaded region enclosed by the line y = 4 x , the curve and the y -axis. [6] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/22/F/M/15 

**10 (a) (i)** Sketch the graph of _y_ = e _x_ 5 on the axes below, showing the exact coordinates of any points where the graph meets the coordinate axes. [3] 

 O x 

 y 

 (ii) Find the range of values of k for which the equation e x^ 5 = k has no solutions. [1] 

 (b) Simplify log 2 log 8 log 2 

## 1 

 a +^ a +^ a 

## J 

## L 

## KK 

## N 

## P 

 OO, giving your answer in the form p log a 2 , where p is a constant. [2] 

 (c) Solve the equation log 3 x log 94 x = 1. [4] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/22/F/M/15 **[Turn over** 

**11 (a)** A particle _P_ moves in a straight line. Starting from rest, _P_ moves with constant acceleration for 30 seconds after which it moves with constant velocity, _k_ ms −1, for 90 seconds. _P_ then moves with constant deceleration until it comes to rest; the magnitude of the deceleration is twice the magnitude of the initial acceleration. 

 (i) Use the information to complete the velocity-time graph. [2] 

 t seconds 

 v ms –1 

 k 

 O 

 (ii) Given that the particle travels 450 metres while it is accelerating, find the value of k and the acceleration of the particle. [4] 

 Question 11(b) is printed on the next page. 


© UCLES 2015 0606/22/F/M/15 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

 (b) A body Q moves in a straight line such that, t seconds after passing a fixed point, its acceleration, a ms−2, is given by a = 3 t 2 + 6. When t = 0, the velocity of the body is 5 ms −1. Find the velocity when t = 3. [5] 


