 This syllabus is regulated for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 16 printed pages. 

 IB19 11_0625_11/4RP © UCLES 2019 [Turn over 

## *6108751254* 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

### PHYSICS 0625/11 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) October/November 2019 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. Take the weight of 1.0 kg to be 10 N (acceleration of free fall = 10 m / s 2 ). 


© UCLES 2019 0625/11/O/N/19 

**1** A student measures the volume of a small irregularly-shaped stone. 

 Which apparatus must be used? 

 A a measuring cylinder containing water and a ruler only 

 B a measuring cylinder containing water only 

 C an empty measuring cylinder and a ruler only 

 D a ruler only 

**2** The graph shows how the speed of an object changes with time. 

 12 

### 8 

### 4 

### 0 

### 0 2 4 6 8 10 

 speed m / s 

 time / s 

 How far does the object travel in 10 seconds? 

 A 8 m B 10 m C 40 m D 80 m 

**3** A car travels at an average speed of 60 km / h for 15 minutes. 

 How far does the car travel in 15 minutes? 

 A 4.0 km B 15 km C 240 km D 900 km 

**4** Which quantity is a force due to a gravitational field? 

 A density 

 B mass 

 C weight 

 D volume 

**5** The density of air is 1.2 kg / m^3. 

 A room has dimensions 5.0 m × 4.0 m × 3.0 m. 

 What is the mass of the air in the room? 

 A 0.02 kg B 0.10 kg C 50 kg D 72 kg 


© UCLES 2019 0625/11/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**6** A student measures the length of a spring. She then attaches different weights to the spring. She measures the length of the spring for each weight. 

 The table shows her results. 

 weight / N length / mm 

 0 520 

 1.0 524 

 2.0 528 

 3.0 533 

 4.0 537 

 5.0 540 

 What is the extension of the spring with a weight of 3.0 N attached to it? 

 A 4 mm B 5 mm C 12 mm D 13 mm 

**7** Which statement gives a complete description of any object that is in equilibrium? 

 A There are no forces acting. 

 B There is no resultant force. 

 C There is no resultant force and no resultant turning effect. 

 D There is no resultant turning effect. 

**8** The diagram shows a lamp. 

 lampshade 

 pole 

 base 

 centre of mass 

 ground 

 Changing which feature increases the stability of the lamp? 

 A a larger lampshade 

 B a longer pole 

 C a heavier base 

 D a higher centre of mass 


© UCLES 2019 0625/11/O/N/19 

**9** Brakes are used to slow down a moving car. 

 Into which form of energy is most of the kinetic energy converted as the car slows down? 

 A chemical 

 B elastic 

 C thermal 

 D sound 

**10** Which does **not** transfer useful energy? 

 A emitting a sound wave 

 B measuring a temperature 

 C passing an electric current 

 D pushing a box along the floor 

**11** The power output from solar panels is recorded every day for a month. 

 The graph shows the output recorded. 

### 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 

 power output 

 day of the month 

 Which conclusion can be drawn from this graph? 

 A The power output from the solar panels changes from day to day. 

 B The power output from the solar panels is cheap to produce. 

 C Solar panels create no pollution. 

 D Solar energy is renewable. 


© UCLES 2019 0625/11/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**12** A drawing pin (thumb tack) has a sharp point at one end and a flat surface at the other end. 

 sharp point flat surface 

 The pin is pushed into a wooden board. 

 How do the pressure and the force at the sharp point compare with the pressure and the force on the flat surface? 

 force at the sharp point pressure at the sharp point 

 A greater than on the flat surface greater than on the flat surface 

 B greater than on the flat surface less than on the flat surface 

 C the same as on the flat surface greater than on the flat surface 

 D the same as on the flat surface less than on the flat surface 

**13** The table shows four forces. Each force acts on a different surface. 

 Which row shows the least pressure? 

 size of the force / N 

 area of the surface / m^2 

 A 0.30 0.040 

 B 10 2.0 

 C 60 15 

 D 1200 40 

**14** A test-tube contains 1.0 cm^3 of liquid water at 100 °C. The liquid water boils to form 1600 cm^3 of steam. 

 What is the reason for the large increase in volume? 

 A Steam molecules are bigger than water molecules. 

 B The average distance between the molecules is much greater in the steam. 

 C The molecules do not move until the water turns into a gas. 

 D There are more steam molecules than there were water molecules. 


© UCLES 2019 0625/11/O/N/19 

**15** Which statement about the evaporation of a liquid is correct? 

 A The least energetic molecules escape from the surface and the temperature of the liquid decreases. 

 B The least energetic molecules escape from the surface and the temperature of the liquid increases. 

 C The most energetic molecules escape from the surface and the temperature of the liquid decreases. 

 D The most energetic molecules escape from the surface and the temperature of the liquid increases. 

**16** Which effect is caused by thermal expansion? 

 A a metal surface heating up in direct sunlight 

 B ice-cream melting on a hot day 

 C a railway track buckling on a hot day 

 D ice forming on a pond on a cold day 

**17** A liquid-in-glass thermometer uses a change in a property of a liquid to measure temperature. 

 Which property is used? 

 A mass 

 B thermal capacity 

 C volume 

 D weight 

**18** The diagram shows four labelled changes of state between solid, liquid and gas. 

 solid liquid gas 

### P 

### S 

### Q 

### R 

 Which changes need an energy input? 

 A P and Q B Q and R C R and S D S and P 


© UCLES 2019 0625/11/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**19** A glass test-tube containing water is heated at the top. The water at the top boils, but the water at the bottom remains cold. 

 water 

 test-tube heat 

 Which row explains why the water at the bottom of the test-tube remains cold? 

 glass water 

 A good thermal conductor good thermal conductor 

 B good thermal conductor poor thermal conductor 

 C poor thermal conductor good thermal conductor 

 D poor thermal conductor poor thermal conductor 

**20** In countries where it is usually hot, houses are often painted white. 

 What is the reason for this? 

 A White surfaces are good reflectors of radiant energy. 

 B White surfaces are good transmitters of radiant energy. 

 C White surfaces are good absorbers of radiant energy. 

 D White surfaces are good emitters of radiant energy. 


© UCLES 2019 0625/11/O/N/19 

**21** The diagram shows wavefronts on the surface of water, viewed from above. 

 region 1 

 region 2 

 deep water 

 shallow water 

 Which row is correct for the wavefronts moving from region 1 to region 2? 

 name of process 

 the speeds of the wavefronts in regions 1 and 2 are 

 A diffraction different 

 B diffraction the same 

 C refraction different 

 D refraction the same 


© UCLES 2019 0625/11/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**22** Plane water waves approach a narrow gap in a barrier. 

 Which diagram shows the diffraction pattern that would occur? 

 A B 

### C D 

**23** The diagram shows the image of a clock in a plane mirror. 

 Which is the actual time? 

 A 04:15 B 04:45 C 07:15 D 07:45 


© UCLES 2019 0625/11/O/N/19 

**24** Total internal reflection may occur when light reaches an air-glass boundary. 

 Under which conditions is light totally internally reflected? 

 medium in which light travels towards the boundary 

 angle of incidence 

 A air greater than the critical angle 

 B air less than the critical angle 

 C glass greater than the critical angle 

 D glass less than the critical angle 

**25** The diagram shows the electromagnetic spectrum. 

 γ-rays X-rays ultraviolet visible light infrared microwaves radio waves 

 increasing ...................... 

 A word is missing from the label below the spectrum. 

 Which word is missing? 

 A amplitude 

 B frequency 

 C speed 

 D wavelength 

**26** A man hears a starting pistol fire 1.5 seconds after he sees a puff of smoke from the pistol. The sound and the smoke are made at the same time. The starting pistol is 450 metres away from the man. 

 What is the speed of sound calculated from this observation? 

 A 150 m / s B 300 m / s C 330 m / s D 625 m / s 


© UCLES 2019 0625/11/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**27** A student has a bar magnet. He brings the magnet close to an object. The magnet and the object repel each other. 

 What must the object be? 

 A another permanent magnet 

 B any magnetic material 

 C a block of wood 

 D a piece of copper 

**28** Two soft-iron rods are placed end-to-end inside a coil. The coil is connected to a battery. 

 soft-iron rod soft-iron rod 

 coil 

 The connections from the battery to the coil are now reversed. 

 What happens to the soft-iron rods in each case? 

 battery connections as shown 

 battery connections reversed 

 A rods attract rods attract 

 B rods attract rods repel 

 C rods repel rods attract 

 D rods repel rods repel 


© UCLES 2019 0625/11/O/N/19 

**29** A plastic rod is rubbed with a dry cloth. The rod becomes positively charged. 

 Why has the rod become positively charged? 

 A It has gained electrons. 

 B It has gained neutrons. 

 C It has lost electrons. 

 D It has lost neutrons. 

**30** A teacher asks her class “What quantity can be recorded in volts?”. 

 Student 1 says “The potential difference across a resistor”. 

 Student 2 says “The rating of a fuse”. 

 Student 3 says “The electromotive force of a battery”. 

 Which students are correct? 

 A 1 only B 1 and 2 C 1 and 3 D 2 and 3 


© UCLES 2019 0625/11/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**31** The circuit shows two lamps connected to a d.c. supply. 

 The same lamps and power supply are arranged in different ways, as shown. 

 P Q R 

 In which circuits will the lamps be the same brightness as in the original circuit? 

 A Q only B P and Q only C P and R only D P, Q and R 

**32** Identical resistors are connected together to form arrangements X, Y and Z. 

### X Y Z 

 What is the correct order of the resistances of the arrangements from the largest to the smallest? 

 A X → Y → Z 

 B Y → X → Z 

 C Z → X → Y 

 D Z → Y → X 


© UCLES 2019 0625/11/O/N/19 

 33 A student uses 100 cm of resistance wire XY in a circuit to make a potential divider. 

### V 

### Y 

### X 

 sliding contact 

 l 

 He changes the length of wire l by moving the sliding contact along the resistance wire. 

 Which graph shows how the voltmeter reading changes as the length of wire l is increased from zero to 100 cm? 

 voltmeter reading / V 

 l / cm 

### 0 

### 0 

### A 

### 100 

 voltmeter reading / V 

 l / cm 

### 0 

### 0 

### B 

### 100 

 voltmeter reading / V 

 l / cm 

### 0 

### 0 

### C 

### 100 

 voltmeter reading / V 

 l / cm 

### 0 

### 0 

### D 

### 100 

**34** Where must a fuse be connected in a mains electric circuit? 

 A the earth wire only 

 B the live wire only 

 C the neutral wire only 

 D the live wire and the earth wire 


© UCLES 2019 0625/11/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**35** A student investigates the output voltage induced across a coil of wire by a bar magnet. 

 When will the induced voltage have the greatest value? 

 A The student slowly moves the bar magnet into the coil of wire. 

 B The student leaves the bar magnet stationary in the coil of wire. 

 C The student quickly removes the bar magnet from the coil of wire. 

 D The student places the bar magnet at rest outside the coil of wire. 

**36** There is a current in a wire. The direction of the current is out of the page. 

 Which diagram shows the magnetic field pattern produced? 

 A B 

### C D 

 key wire carrying a current out of the page 

**37** Which diagram shows a possible structure of a neutral atom? 

### C D 

### A B 

 key 

 proton 

 neutron 

 electron 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2019 0625/11/O/N/19 

**38** A nuclide of cobalt contains 27 protons and 32 neutrons. 

 Which symbol represents this nuclide? 

### A 

### 27 

# 59 Co^ B^ 

### 32 

# 27 Co^ C^ 

### 32 

# 59 Co^ D^ 

### 59 

# 27 Co 

**39** An isotope of radon is radioactive. It decays by emitting an α-particle. 

 What happens to the nucleus of a radon atom during the emission of the α-particle? 

 A It becomes the nucleus of a different isotope of radon with fewer neutrons. 

 B It becomes the nucleus of a different isotope of radon with more neutrons. 

 C It becomes the nucleus of an element with a higher proton number. 

 D It becomes the nucleus of an element with a lower proton number. 

**40** Why are some radioactive sources stored in boxes made from lead? 

 A Lead absorbs emissions from the radioactive sources. 

 B Lead decreases the half-life of radioactive sources. 

 C Lead increases the half-life of radioactive sources. 

 D Lead repels emissions from the radioactive sources. 


