 This syllabus is regulated for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 7 printed pages. 

© UCLES 2019 **[Turn over** 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

**PHYSICS 0625/52** Paper 5 Practical **October/November 2019** MARK SCHEME Maximum Mark: 40 

 Published 

This mark scheme is published as an aid to teachers and candidates, to indicate the requirements of the examination. It shows the basis on which Examiners were instructed to award marks. It does not indicate the details of the discussions that took place at an Examiners’ meeting before marking began, which would have considered the acceptability of alternative answers. 

Mark schemes should be read in conjunction with the question paper and the Principal Examiner Report for Teachers. 

Cambridge International will not enter into discussions about these mark schemes. 

Cambridge International is publishing the mark schemes for the October/November 2019 series for most Cambridge IGCSE™, Cambridge International A and AS Level components and some Cambridge O Level components. 


## 0625/52 

Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

October/November 2019 

 © UCLES 2019 

 Page 2 of 7 

 Generic Marking Principles 

 These general marking principles must be applied by all examiners when marking candidate answers. They should be applied alongside thespecific content of the mark scheme or generic level descriptors for a question. Each question paper and mark scheme will also comply with thesemarking principles.GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 1:Marks must be awarded in line with:^ • 

 the specific content of the mark scheme or the generic level descriptors for the question 

-^ 

 the specific skills defined in the mark scheme or in the generic level descriptors for the question 

-^ 

 the standard of response required by a candidate as exemplified by the standardisation scripts. GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 2:Marks awarded are always 

 whole marks 

 (not half marks, or other fractions). 

 GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 3:Marks must be awarded 

 positively 

## : 

## •^ 

 marks are awarded for correct/valid answers, as defined in the mark scheme. However, credit is given for valid answers which go beyondthe scope of the syllabus and mark scheme, referring to your Team Leader as appropriate 

-^ 

 marks are awarded when candidates clearly demonstrate what they know and can do 

-^ 

 marks are not deducted for errors 

-^ 

 marks are not deducted for omissions 

-^ 

 answers should only be judged on the quality of spelling, punctuation and grammar when these features are specifically assessed by thequestion as indicated by the mark scheme. The meaning, however, should be unambiguous. GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 4:Rules must be applied consistently e.g. in situations where candidates have not followed instructions or in the application of generic leveldescriptors. 


Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

October/November 2019 

 Page 3 of 7 

 GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 5:Marks should be awarded using the full range of marks defined in the mark scheme for the question (however; the use of the full mark rangemay be limited according to the quality of the candidate responses seen).GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 6:Marks awarded are based solely on the requirements as defined in the mark scheme. Marks should not be awarded with grade thresholds orgrade descriptors in mind. 


Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

October/November 2019 

 Page 4 of 7 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 1(a) 

 table: t^ values increasing 

 1 

 T^ values = 

 t^ / 

## 20 

 1 

## T^50 

## = 1.4 

## ±^ 

## 0.1 

 (s) 

 1 

(^2) _T_ correct **1** 1(b) graph:^ axes correctly labelled and right way round **1** suitable scales **1** all plots correct to ½ small square **1** good line judgement, thin, continuous line **1** 1(c) triangle method indicated on graph 

## 1 

 1(d) 

 correct calculation of 

 g^ 

## 1 

 to 2 or 3 significant figures 

 1 


Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

October/November 2019 

 Page 5 of 7 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 2(a)(i) 

 I^ to at least 2dp < 1 

## A^ 

## 1 

 with correct unit 

 1 

 2(a)(ii) 

 table: V^ 

 values < 4 

## V^ 

 1 

## V^ 

 values increasing 

 1 

## V^ 

 values consistent to either 1 or 2 decimal places 

 1 

## R^ 

 correct 

 1 

 2(b)(i) 

 one box ticked, matching results 

## 1 

 2(b)(ii) 

 justification to match 

 (i) 

 1 

 2(c)(i) 

 value approximately halfway between 40 

 cm and 60 

 cm values 

 1 

 2(c)(ii) 

 correct 

## R 

 value 

 1 

 2 or 3 significant figures with unit 

## 1 


Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

October/November 2019 

 Page 6 of 7 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 3(a)(i) 

 u^ = 55–65 

 (cm) 

## 1 

 3(a)(ii) 

 v^ = 80 

## −^ 

 u^ ( 

## ±^2 

 cm) 

 1 

 3(a)(iii) 

 correct calculation of 

 f^ 

 1 

 3(b) 

 u^ = 15–25 

 (cm) and 

 v^ 

## = 80 

## −^ 

 u^ ( 

## ±^2 

 cm) 

## 1 

 u^ and 

 v^ 

 values in table all in cm to the nearest mm 

 1 

 3(c) 

 correct average 

## 1 

 2 or 3 significant figures 

 1 

 3(d) 

 one from:darkened room 

 /^ brighter lamp 

 object and lens at same height (above bench)object and lens and screen perpendicular to the benchruler on bench or clampedmark centre of lens on holdermove lens slowly 

 /^ back and forth (to obtain best image) 

## 1 

 3(e)(i) 

## D^ 

## = 120(.0) 

 (cm) 

## 1 

 3(e)(ii) 

 f^ = 18.1 

 (cm) 

 1 

 3(e)(iii) 

 Statement matches results (expect NO)justification to include the explanation of within 

 /^ beyond the limits of experimental accuracy 

 1 


Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

October/November 2019 

 Page 7 of 7 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

## 4 

 MP1 method diagram showing container, ice cubes, (thermometer and insulation) 

## 1 

 MP2 method ice (in container), measure time (for all the ice) to melt 

 1 

 MP3 repeat with different insulators 

 1 

 MP4 control variables (total) mass 

 /^ volume of ice cubes 

 1 

 MP5 control variables any 

 one 

 from: 

 thickness 

 /^ amount of insulation 

 room temperature 

 /^ other environmental condition 

 size 

 /^ shape 

 /^ surface area of ice cubes 

 initial temperature of ice cubes 

 1 

 MP6 table table with headings of (named) insulator and time with correct units 

 1 

 MP7 conclusion (use the table to) compare the insulator with the time taken for the ice to melt 

 1 


