This syllabus is regulated for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate.This document consists of **10** printed pages. © UCLES 2019 **[Turn over** 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

**PHYSICS** Paper 3 Core Theory MARK SCHEME (^) **October/November 20190625/33** Maximum Mark: 80 **Published** This mark scheme is published as an aid to teachers and candidates, to indicate the requirements of theexamination. It shows the basis on which Examiners were instructed to award marks. It does not indicate thedetails of the discussions that took place at an Examiners’ meeting before marking began, which would haveconsidered the acceptability of alternative answers. Mark schemes should be read in conjunction with the question paper and the Principal Examiner Report forTeachers.Cambridge International will not enter into discussions about these mark schemes. Cambridge International is publishing the mark schemes for the October/November 2019 series for mostCambridge IGCSE™, Cambridge International A and AS Level components and some Cambridge O Levelcomponents. 


## 0625/33^ 

Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

October/November 2019 

 © UCLES 2019 

 Page 2 of 10 Generic Marking Principles 

 These general marking principles must be applied by all examiners when marking candidate answers. They should be applied alongside thespecific content of the mark scheme or generic level descriptors for a question. Each question paper and mark scheme will also comply with thesemarking principles.GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 1:Marks must be awarded in line with:^ •^ the specific content of the mark scheme or the generic level descriptors for the question^ •^ the specific skills defined in the mark scheme or in the generic level descriptors for the question^ •^ the standard of response required by a candidate as exemplified by the standardisation scripts.GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 2:Marks awarded are always 

 whole marks 

 (not half marks, or other fractions). 

 GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 3:Marks must be awarded 

 positively 

## : 

-^ marks are awarded for correct/valid answers, as defined in the mark scheme. However, credit is given for valid answers which go beyondthe scope of the syllabus and mark scheme, referring to your Team Leader as appropriate •^ marks are awarded when candidates clearly demonstrate what they know and can do •^ marks are not deducted for errors •^ marks are not deducted for omissions •^ answers should only be judged on the quality of spelling, punctuation and grammar when these features are specifically assessed by thequestion as indicated by the mark scheme. The meaning, however, should be unambiguous.GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 4:Rules must be applied consistently e.g. in situations where candidates have not followed instructions or in the application of generic leveldescriptors. 


Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

October/November 2019 

 Page 3 of 10 

 GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 5:Marks should be awarded using the full range of marks defined in the mark scheme for the question (however; the use of the full mark range maybe limited according to the quality of the candidate responses seen).GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 6:Marks awarded are based solely on the requirements as defined in the mark scheme. Marks should not be awarded with grade thresholds orgrade descriptors in mind. 


Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

October/November 2019 

 Page 4 of 10 

 NOTES ABOUT MARK SCHEME SYMBOLS & OTHER MATTERS 

 B^ marks^ 

 are independent marks, which do not depend on other marks. For a B mark to be scored, the point to which it refers must beseen specifically in the candidate’s answer. M marks^ 

 are method marks upon which accuracy marks (A marks) later depend. For an M mark to be scored, the point to which it refers must^ be seen in a candidate's answer. If a candidate fails to score a particular M mark, then none of the dependent A markscan be scored. C marks^ 

 are compensatory marks in general applicable to numerical questions. These can be scored even if the point to which theyrefer are not written down by the candidate, 

 provided subsequent working gives evidence that they must have known it. 

 For example, if an equation carries a C mark and the candidate does not write down the actual equation but does correctsubstitution or working which shows he knew the equation, then the C mark is scored. A C mark is not awarded if a candidatemakes two points which contradict each other. Points which are wrong but irrelevant are ignored. A marks^ 

 A marks are accuracy or answer marks which either depend on an M mark, or which are one of the ways which allow a C markto be scored. A marks are commonly awarded for final answers to numerical questions. If a final numerical answer, eligible forA marks, is correct, with the correct unit and an acceptable number of significant figures, all the marks for that question arenormally awarded. It is very occasionally possible to arrive at a correct answer by an entirely wrong approach. In these rarecircumstances, do not award the A marks, but award C marks on their merits. An A mark following an M mark is a dependentmark. Brackets ( ) 

 Brackets around words or units in the mark scheme are intended to indicate wording used to clarify the mark scheme, but themarks do not depend on seeing the words or units in brackets, e.g. 10 (J) means that the mark is scored for 10, regardless ofthe unit given. Underlining 

 Underlining indicates that this must be seen in the answer offered, or something very similar. OR / or^ 

 This indicates alternative answers, any one of which is satisfactory for scoring the marks. e.e.o.o.^ 

 This means "each error or omission". o.w.t.t.e.^ 

 This means “or words to that effect”. Ignore^ 

 This indicates that something which is not correct or irrelevant is to be disregarded and does not cause a right plus wrongpenalty. 


Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

October/November 2019 

 Page 5 of 10 

 Spelling^ 

 Be generous about spelling and use of English. If an answer can be understood to mean what we want, give credit. However,do not allow ambiguities, e.g. spelling which suggests confusion between reflection / refraction / diffraction or thermistor /transistor / transformer. Not/NOT 

 This indicates that an incorrect answer is not to be disregarded, but cancels another otherwise correct alternative offered by thecandidate, i.e. right plus wrong penalty applies. ecf^ 

 meaning "error carried forward" is mainly applicable to numerical questions, but may in particular circumstances be applied innon-numerical questions. This indicates that if a candidate has made an earlier mistake and has carried an incorrect valueforward to subsequent stages of working, marks indicated by ecf may be awarded, provided the subsequent working is correct,bearing in mind the earlier mistake. This prevents a candidate from being penalised more than once for a particular mistake,but^ only^ 

 applies to marks annotated ecf. 

 Significant 

 Answers are normally acceptable to any number of significant figures 

 ≥^ 2. Any figures exceptions to this general rule will be 

 specified in the mark scheme. Arithmeticerrors 

 Deduct one mark if the 

 only^ error in arriving at a final answer is clearly an arithmetic one. Regard a power-of-ten error as an arithmetic error. Transcriptionerrors 

 Deduct one mark if the only error in arriving at a final answer is because previously errors 

 calculated data has clearly been 

 misread but used correctly. Fractions 

 Allow these only where specified in the mark scheme. Crossed outwork 

 Work which has been crossed out 

 and not replaced but can easily be read 

 , should be marked as if it had not been crossed 

 out. Use of^ NR 

 Use this if the answer space for a question is completely blank or contains no readable words, figures or symbol space for aquestion is completely blank or contains no readable words, figures or symbols. 


Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

October/November 2019 

 Page 6 of 10 

 Question 

 Answer^ 

 Marks 

 1(a)^ 

## 226.50 – 82.10 

## OR^ 3:46.5(0) – 1:22.1(0) 

 OR^ 2 min 24.4 

 (s) 

## 144.4(0)^ 

 (s) 

## C1A1 

 1(b)^ 

 start stopwatch as LED lights owttecount large number of flashes i.e. > = 10stop stopwatch on nth lighting of LED AND n > = 1divide time on stopwatch by n 

## B4 

 Question 

 Answer^ 

 Marks 

 2(a)^ 

 speed = (total) distance ÷ time in any form12 ÷ 1.5 8 (km^ /^ h) 

## C1C1A1 

 2(b)(i)^ 

 distance = area under graph 

 OR^ area = ½ 

 ×^ base^ × 

 height 

## ½^ ×^ 3.0^ × 

 4.06(.0) (m) 

## C1C1A1 

 2(b)(ii)^ 

 (between) 10(.0) and 12(.0)steepest section of graph / greatest gradient 

## M1A1 

 2(c)^ 

 W = mg in any form 72 ×^10 720 (N) 

## C1C1A1 

 Question 

 Answer^ 

 Marks 

 3(a)(i)^ 

## 8.0^ (N)^ AND 

 forwards / to the left 

## B1 

 3(a)(ii)^ 

 acceleratingforwards / to the left 

## B1 B1 

 3(b)^ 

 greater drag force 

 /^ air resistance 

 OR^ lower thrust owtte 

## B1 


Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

October/November 2019 

 Page 7 of 10 

 Question 

 Answer^ 

 Marks 

 4(a)(i)^ 

 (gravitational) potential energy 

## B1 

 4(a)(ii)^ 

 2nd (bag)as it has a greater load 

 /^ force^ /^ weight (moved through same distance) 

## B1 

 4(a)(iii)^ 

 time (taken)(vertical) height (raised) 

 /^ distance 

## B1B1 

 4(b)^ 

## B AE DC 

## B3 

 Question 

 Answer^ 

 Marks 

 5(a)^ 

1.^ melting2.^ boiling 

 /^ evaporation 

3.^ freezing 

 /^ solidification 

## B1B1B1 

 5(b)^ 

 Any^ three 

 from: (evaporation –) most energetic molecules escape from surface of liquidaverage KE of molecules remaining in liquid decreasestemperature of liquid decreasesenergy transfers from water (on bench) to liquid (so water cools 

 /^ freezes) 

## B3 


Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

October/November 2019 

 Page 8 of 10 

 Question 

 Answer^ 

 Marks 

 6(a)(i)^ 

 vertical arrow pointing down 

 AND^ up^ 

## B1 

 6(a)(ii)^ 

## (10.0 ÷ 4 =) 2.5 

 (cm)^ 

## B1 

 6(a)(iii)^ 

 more waves 

 /^ waves closer together 

 /^ shorter wavelength 

## B1 

 6(b)(i)^ 

 light^ AND 

 radio^ 

## B1 

 6(b)(ii)^ 

 sound^ OR 

 ultrasound 

 OR^ longitudinal 

## B1 

 Question 

 Answer^ 

 Marks 

 7(a)^ 

 (degrees) celsius 

 o OR C volume 

## B1B1 

 7(b)^ 

 Lower o 0 C(water) freezes 

 OR^ turns to ice Upper o 100 C (water) boils 

## B1B1 B1B1 

 Question 

 Answer^ 

 Marks 

 8(a)^ 

 normal^ 

## B1 

 8(b)^ 

 angle of incidence: Nangle of reflection: Sangle of refraction: P 

## B1B1B1 

 8(c)^ 

 refractionchange in speed 

 OR^ different refractive indices 

## B1 


Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

October/November 2019 

 Page 9 of 10 

 Question 

 Answer^ 

 Marks 

 9(a)(i)^ 

 either N and N 

 OR^ S and S facing each other 

## B1 

 9(a)(ii)^ 

 repel^ /^ repulsion 

## B1 

 9(a)(iii)^ 

 attracted^ 

 OR^ steel bar moves towards magnet A 

## B1 

 9(b)(i)^ 

 prediction: one end attracts 

 AND^ the other end repels 

 reason: like poles repel 

 OR^ unlike poles attract 

## B1B1 

 9(b)(ii)^ 

 they attract(because) steel forms a permanent magnet owtte 

## B1B1 

 9(b)(iii)^ 

 sorting scrap metal 

 OR^ doorbell 

 OR^ relay 

 OR^ (electric) motor 

 OR^ circuit breakers 

## B1 

 Question 

 Answer^ 

 Marks 

 10(a)^ 

 thermistor 

## B1 

 10(b)(i)^ 

## 2000 (Ω)^ 

## B1 

 10(b)(ii)^ 

## (I =) V ÷ R 

## OR^ V = I 

 ×^ R^ in any form 12 ÷ 8000.015^ (A) 

## C1C1A1 


Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

October/November 2019 

 Page 10 of 10 

 Question 

 Answer^ 

 Marks 

 11(a)(i)^ 

 current is in one direction 

## B1 

 11(a)(ii)^ 

 symbols for two cells connected in seriessymbol for a switch 

## B1B1 

 11(b)(i)^ 

 motor^ 

## B1 

 11(b)(ii) 

 any^ two^ from:increasing number of turns on coilincreasing the current (in the coil)increasing the strength of the magnetic field 

## B2 

 Question 

 Answer^ 

 Marks 

 12(a)(i)^ 

 same proton number 

 OR^ same number of protons 

 OR^ same atomic number 

 OR^ same Z 

## B1 

 12(a)(ii)^ 

 different nucleon number 

 OR^ different number of neutrons 

 OR^ different mass number 

 OR^ different A 

## B1 

 12(b)^ 

 alpha, beta and gamma 

 OR^ symbols 

## B2 

 12(c)^ 

 top line: electrons – positive(ly)bottom line: electrons – negative(ly) 

## B2B2 

 12(d)^ 

 two half-lives indicated^10 2.0^ ×^10 

 (atoms remain) 

## C1A1 


