 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 17 printed pages and 3 blank pages. 

 IB16 11_0620_11/6RP © UCLES 2016 [Turn over 

# *6275559010* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/11 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) October/November 2016 

 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 20. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/11/O/N/16 

**1** ‘Particles moving **very slowly** from an area of higher concentration to an area of lower concentration.’ 

 Which process is being described? 

 A a liquid being frozen 

 B a solid melting 

 C a substance diffusing through a liquid 

 D a substance diffusing through the air 

**2** A student mixes 25 cm^3 samples of dilute hydrochloric acid with different volumes of aqueous sodium hydroxide. 

 In each case, the student measures the change in temperature to test if the reaction is exothermic. 

 Which piece of apparatus is not needed? 

 burette clock pipette thermometer 

## A B C D 


© UCLES 2016 0620/11/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**3** Information about the solubility of four solids, P, Q, R and S, is given in the table. 

## P Q R S 

 solubility in water dissolves insoluble insoluble dissolves 

 A student attempted to separate mixtures of these solids using the following method. 

 1 Add the mixture to a beaker of water and stir. 

 2 Filter the mixture. 

 3 Crystallise one of the solids from the filtrate. 

 Which of the following mixtures could not be separated by this method? 

 A a mixture of P and R 

 B a mixture of Q and P 

 C a mixture of Q and R 

 D a mixture of R and S 

**4** The table shows information about atoms of three different elements. 

element (^) numberproton nucleonnumber number ofprotons number ofneutrons number ofelectrons chlorine 17 35 17 W 17 chlorine 17 X 17 19 17 argon Y 40 18 22 18 potassium 19 39 19 20 Z What are the values of W, X, Y and Z? 

## W X Y Z 

## A 18 35 18 19 

## B 18 36 18 19 

## C 19 35 19 18 

## D 19 36 19 18 


© UCLES 2016 0620/11/O/N/16 

**5** The diagrams show the structures of two forms of the same element. 

## T U 

 What are the reasons for using T in cutting tools and U as a lubricant? 

## T U 

 A It is very hard because each atom is held in place by strong covalent bonds. 

 The layers can slide over each other because the covalent bonds are weak. 

 B It is very hard because each atom is held in place by strong covalent bonds. 

 The layers can slide over each other due to weak forces between the layers. 

 C It is very hard because there are no electrons able to move. 

 The layers can slide over each other because the covalent bonds are weak. 

 D It is very hard because there are no electrons able to move. 

 The layers can slide over each other due to weak forces between the layers. 

**6** Ions are formed by elements losing or gaining electrons. 

 Which statement is correct? 

 A Metal atoms gain electrons to form positive ions. 

 B Non-metal atoms lose electrons to form positive ions. 

 C The charge on an ion is always either +1 or –1. 

 D Group I ions have the same electronic structure as noble gases. 

**7** A molecule of X contains two carbon atoms, four hydrogen atoms and two oxygen atoms. 

 What is the formula of X? 

 A CH 2 CO 2 H B CH 3 COH C CH 3 COOH D C 2 H 3 COOH 


© UCLES 2016 0620/11/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**8** Concentrated aqueous potassium chloride is electrolysed using platinum electrodes. 

 The solution contains the ions K +, C l – , H+^ and OH –. 

 Which electrodes are the ions attracted to during this electrolysis? 

 anode cathode 

 A C l –^ and K +^ H+^ and OH – 

 B C l –^ and OH –^ H+^ and K + 

 C H+^ and K +^ C l –^ and OH – 

 D H+^ and OH –^ C l –^ and K + 

**9** Which apparatus could be used to electroplate an iron nail with copper? 

## + – 

## A 

## + – 

## B 

## + – 

## C D 

# aqueous copper(II) sulfate 

# aqueous iron(II) sulfate 

## + – 

 key 

 = copper sheet 

 = iron nail 


© UCLES 2016 0620/11/O/N/16 

# 10 When anhydrous copper(II) sulfate is added to water a solution is formed and heat is given out. 

 water 

 anhydrous 

# copper(II) sulfate 

 thermometer 

 Which row shows the temperature change and the type of reaction taking place? 

 temperature change type of reaction 

 A decrease endothermic 

 B decrease exothermic 

 C increase endothermic 

 D increase exothermic 

**11** The combustion of element X releases large amounts of energy. 

 What is X? 

 A ethanol 

 B hydrogen 

 C methane 

 D uranium 


© UCLES 2016 0620/11/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**12** The rate of reaction between magnesium and excess dilute hydrochloric acid was followed by measuring the mass of magnesium present at regular time intervals. 

 Two experiments were performed. 

 Both experiments used 0.1 g of magnesium ribbon. The acid in experiment 1 was less concentrated than in experiment 2. 

 Which graph shows the results of the experiments? 

 A 

 mass of magnesium 

 time 

## C 

 mass of magnesium 

 time 

## 1 

## 2 

## 2 

## 1 

## B 

 mass of magnesium 

 time 

## D 

## 0 

## 0 

## 0 

## 0 

## 0 

## 0 

## 0 

## 0 

 mass of magnesium 

 time 

## 2 

## 1 

## 1 

## 2 

**13** Which reaction is reversible? 

**A** CuCO 3 + 2HC _l_ → CuC _l_ (^) 2 + CO 2 + H 2 O **B** CuSO 4 .5H 2 O → CuSO 4 + 5H 2 O **C** 2Na + 2H 2 O → 2NaOH + H (^2) **D** NaOH + HC _l_ → NaC _l_ + H 2 O 

# 14 Tin is formed when tin(II) oxide is heated with carbon. 

# What happens to the tin in the tin(II) oxide in this reaction? 

 A It is burnt. 

 B It is electrolysed. 

 C It is oxidised. 

 D It is reduced. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/11/O/N/16 

**15** Part of the Periodic Table is shown. 

 Which element forms an acidic oxide? 

## A 

## D 

## C 

## B 

**16** Four substances, P, Q, R and S, are tested as shown. 

 test 

 substance 

 P Q R S 

 dilute hydrochloric acid added 

 gas given off which ‘pops’ with a lighted splint 

 gas given off which turns limewater milky 

 no reaction no reaction 

 dilute aqueous sodium hydroxide added and warmed gently 

 no reaction no reaction 

 gas given off which turns damp, red litmus paper blue 

 no reaction 

 What are P, Q, R and S? 

## P Q R S 

 A Mg Na 2 CO 3 NH 4 C l NaC l 

 B Mg NH 4 C l Na 2 CO 3 NaC l 

 C Mg Na 2 CO 3 NaC l NH 4 C l 

 D Na 2 CO 3 Mg NaC l NH 4 C l 

**17** Acids can react with metal oxides, carbonates and metals. 

 Which reactions produce a gas? 

 acid with metal oxide 

 acid with carbonate 

 acid with metal 

 A    key 

 B    = gas is produced 

 C    = no gas is produced 

 D    


© UCLES 2016 0620/11/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

# 18 The apparatus shown is used to prepare aqueous copper(II) sulfate. 

## Y 

 stirrer 

 solid X 

 aqueous 

# copper(II) sulfate 

 excess of solid X 

 filter paper 

 heat 

 What are X and Y? 

## X Y 

# A copper aqueous iron(II) sulfate 

# B copper(II) chloride sulfuric acid 

# C copper(II) oxide sulfuric acid 

# D sulfur aqueous copper(II) chloride 

**19** Which statement about trends in the Periodic Table is **not** correct? 

 A Elements in the same period have the same number of electron shells. 

 B The elements change from metals to non-metals from left to right. 

 C The number of protons in an atom of an element increases from left to right. 

 D The oxides of the elements change from acidic to basic from left to right. 

**20** What is **not** a property of Group I metals? 

 A They are soft and can be cut with a knife. 

 B They react when exposed to oxygen in the air. 

 C They produce an acidic solution when they react with water. 

 D They react rapidly with water producing hydrogen gas. 

**21** Which statement about the element with proton number 54 is correct? 

 A It burns in the air to form an oxide. 

 B It could be used in balloons because it has a very low density. 

 C It is a gas at room temperature. 

 D It is reactive because it has a full outer shell of electrons. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/11/O/N/16 

**22** Which element is a transition element? 

 colour of chloride 

 melting point of element / °C 

 A orange 113 

 B orange 1535 

 C white 113 

 D white 1535 

**23** Which row describes the trends in the properties of the Group VII elements as the group is descended? 

 colour density reactivity with halide ions 

 A darkens decreases increases 

 B darkens increases decreases 

 C lightens decreases increases 

 D lightens increases decreases 

**24** Four metals are listed in decreasing order of reactivity. 

 magnesium 

 zinc 

 iron 

 copper 

 Titanium reacts with acid and cannot be extracted from its ore by heating with carbon. 

 Where should titanium be placed in the list? 

 A below copper 

 B between iron and copper 

 C between magnesium and zinc 

 D between zinc and iron 


© UCLES 2016 0620/11/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**25** Impure iron from the blast furnace is converted to steel as shown. 

 oxygen 

 impure molten iron 

 Which statement about the process is correct? 

 A Acidic oxides are added to remove alkaline impurities. 

 B Coke is added as a reducing agent. 

 C Oxygen is blown in to oxidise the impure iron. 

 D The steel produced contains less carbon than the impure iron. 

**26** A student added dilute hydrochloric acid to four metals and recorded the results. 

 Some of the results are not correct. 

 results 

 metal gas given off 

 1 copper yes 

 2 iron yes 

 3 magnesium no 

 4 zinc yes 

 Which two results are correct? 

 A 1 and 3 B 1 and 4 C 2 and 3 D 2 and 4 


© UCLES 2016 0620/11/O/N/16 

**27** Some properties of three metals, P, Q and R, are shown. 

 metal density resistance to corrosion electrical conductivity 

 P low high very good 

 Q high high very good 

 R low low good 

 Which metals would be suitable for use in electrical wiring and aircraft manufacture? 

 electrical wiring aircraft manufacture 

 A P Q 

 B Q P 

 C Q R 

 D R P 

**28** One sample of sea-water is distilled while another sample of sea-water is filtered. 

 Which statement about the samples is correct? 

 A The distilled sample boils at exactly 100 °C and contains dissolved salts. 

 B The distilled sample boils at 103 °C and does not contain dissolved salts. 

 C The filtered sample boils at 103 °C and contains dissolved salts. 

 D The filtered sample boils at exactly 100 °C and does not contain dissolved salts. 

**29** Air is a mixture of gases. 

 Which gas is present in the largest amount? 

 A argon 

 B carbon dioxide 

 C nitrogen 

 D oxygen 


© UCLES 2016 0620/11/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**30** Which information about carbon dioxide and methane is correct? 

 carbon dioxide methane 

 A formed when vegetation decomposes   key 

 B greenhouse gas    = true 

 C present in unpolluted air    = false 

 D produced during respiration   

**31** A mixture of two substances, X and Y, is heated. 

 The damp, red litmus paper turns blue. 

 damp, red litmus paper 

 X and Y 

 gentle heat 

 What are X and Y? 

## X Y 

 A aluminium nitrate hydrochloric acid 

 B aluminium nitrate sodium hydroxide solution 

 C ammonium chloride hydrochloric acid 

 D ammonium chloride sodium hydroxide solution 


© UCLES 2016 0620/11/O/N/16 

**32** In the experiment shown, a white precipitate forms in the limewater. 

## X 

## Y 

 limewater 

 What are X and Y? 

## X Y 

 A aqueous sodium hydroxide zinc 

 B aqueous sodium hydroxide zinc carbonate 

 C dilute sulfuric acid zinc 

 D dilute sulfuric acid zinc carbonate 

**33** Which box corresponds to limestone? 

 Does limestone contain carbon? 

 yes no 

 yes no 

 Does limestone burn? Does limestone burn? 

## A B 

 yes no 

## C D 


© UCLES 2016 0620/11/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**34** Petroleum is an important fossil fuel. 

 Which row correctly describes petroleum? 

 type of substance composition 

 A compound mainly hydrocarbons 

 B compound^ only hydrogen and carbon C mixture mainly hydrocarbons 

 D mixture only hydrogen and carbon 

**35** Butane reacts as shown. 

 butane butene + hydrogen 

 catalyst and heat 

 What is this type of reaction? 

 A combustion 

 B cracking 

 C polymerisation 

 D reduction 

**36** Which substance is in the same homologous series as methanol? 

 A 

## C C 

## O 

## OH 

## B 

## H C C OH 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## C C C H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## C C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## D 

**37** Which statement could **not** be correct for an alkane? 

 A It burns readily in a plentiful supply of air to form only carbon dioxide and water. 

 B It decolourises aqueous bromine. 

 C It has a boiling point of – 42 °C. 

 D The carbon and hydrogen atoms in the molecule are joined by sharing pairs of electrons. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/11/O/N/16 

**38** In which conical flask will ethanol be produced? 

 A B C D 

 water and sugar 

 sugar and yeast 

 water, sugar and yeast 

 water and yeast 

**39** Which molecule can be polymerised? 

## H C 

## A 

## H 

## H 

## H H C 

## B 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## D 

## H C 

H (^) O 

## O 

## C 

## H 

**40** Which row describes what happens when ethanol burns in air? 

 a white powder is left 

 heat energy is given out 

 carbon dioxide is formed 

 water is formed 

 A     

 B     

 C     

 D     


## BLANK PAGE 

© UCLES 2016 0620/11/O/N/16 


## BLANK PAGE 

© UCLES 2016 0620/11/O/N/16 


## BLANK PAGE 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2016 0620/11/O/N/16 


© UCLES 2016 0620/11/O/N/16 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements 

(^1) H hydrogen 1 (^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III IV V^ VI VII VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Be beryllium 9 atomic number atomic symbol **Key**^ name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mg magnesium 24 19 K potassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Sr strontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Ge germanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 (^22) Tititanium (^4840) Zr zirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rf rutherfordium 

- 

 23 V vanadium 

(^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Cr chromium (^5242) Mo molybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sg seaborgium 

- 

(^25) Mn manganese (^5543) Tc technetium – (^75) Re rhenium^186107 Bhbohrium 

- 

(^26) Feiron (^5644) Ru ruthenium^101 (^76) Ososmium (^190108) Hs hassium 

- 

(^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Iriridium (^192109) Mt meitnerium 

- 

(^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pd palladium^106 (^78) Ptplatinum (^195110) Ds darmstadtium 

- 

(^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rg roentgenium 

- 

(^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cd cadmium^112 (^80) Hgmercury (^201112) Cn copernicium 

- 

 114 F 

 l flerovium 

- 

(^116) Lv livermorium 

- 

(^7) N nitrogen^1415 Pphosphorus^3133 Asarsenic^7551 Sbantimony^12283 Bibismuth^209 (^8) O oxygen^1616 Ssulfur^3234 Seselenium^7952 Tetellurium^12884 Popolonium 

- 

(^9) F fluorine^1917 C _l_ chlorine35.5^35 Brbromine^8053 I iodine 12785 At astatine 

- 

(^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Sc scandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71 lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) La lanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.) actinium 

- 

(^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium (^14191) Pa protactinium 231 (^60) Nd neodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pm promethium – (^93) Np neptunium 

- 

(^62) Sm samarium^150 (^94) Pu plutonium 

- 

(^63) Eu europium^152 (^95) Am americium 

- 

(^64) Gd gadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bk berkelium 

- 

(^66) Dy dysprosium 16398 Cf californium 

- 

(^67) Ho holmium^165 (^99) Es einsteinium 

- 

(^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Md mendelevium 

- 

(^70) Yb ytterbium^173102 Nonobelium 

- 

(^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lr lawrencium 

- 


