 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 20 printed pages. IB16 11_0620_21/6RP© UCLES 2016 [Turn over 

# *6942475041* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/21 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) October/November 2016 Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet^ 45 minutes Soft clean eraserSoft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid.Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you.DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

There areanswers A (^) ,forty B, C questions on this paper. Answerand D. all questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet.A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 20. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/21/O/N/16 

1 ‘Particlesconcentration.’ moving very slowly from an area of higher concentration to an area of lower 

 Which process is being described? A a liquid being frozen B a solid melting C a substance diffusing through a liquid D a substance diffusing through the air 

2 A student mixes 25 cm^3 samples of dilute hydrochloric acid with different volumes of aqueous sodium hydroxide. In each case, the student measures the change in temperature to test if the reaction is exothermic. Which piece of apparatus is not needed? 

 burette clock pipette thermometer 

## A B C D 


© UCLES 2016 0620/21/O/N/16 [Turn over 

3 Information about the solubility of four solids, P, Q, R and S, is given in the table. 

 P Q R S solubility in water dissolves insoluble insoluble dissolves A student attempted to separate mixtures of these solids using the following method. 1 Add the mixture to a beaker of water and stir. 2 Filter the mixture. 3 Crystallise one of the solids from the filtrate. Which of the following mixtures could not be separated by this method? A a mixture of P and R B a mixture of Q and P C a mixture of Q and R D a mixture of R and S 

4 The table shows information about atoms of three different elements. 

element (^) numberproton nucleonnumber number ofprotons number ofneutrons number ofelectrons chlorine 17 35 17 W 17 chlorine 17 X 17 19 17 argon Y 40 18 22 18 potassium 19 39 19 20 Z What are the values of W, X, Y and Z? W X Y Z A 18 35 18 19 B 18 36 18 19 C 19 35 19 18 D 19 36 19 18 


© UCLES 2016 0620/21/O/N/16 

5 Metal P reacts with non-metal Q to form a compound. Which process takes place and which type of compound is formed? process type of compound A electrons are transferred from P to Q covalent B electrons are transferred from P to Q ionic C electrons are transferred from Q to P covalent D electrons are transferred from Q to P ionic 

6 The structure of ethanoic acid is shown. 

 C 

## O 

## O H 

## H C 

## H 

## H 

 Which diagram shows the arrangement of outer shell electrons in a molecule of ethanoic acid? 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## O 

## O 

## H C 

## A 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## O 

## O 

## H C 

## B 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## O 

## O 

## H C 

## C 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## O 

## O 

## H C 

## D 


© UCLES 2016 0620/21/O/N/16 [Turn over 

7 X is a solid at room temperature. X has a high melting point. Solid X conducts electricity. Which diagram shows how the particles are arranged in solid X? 

 + + + + 

 + 

 + + + 

- + 

- 

 + 

- + 

- + 

- 

 + 

- + 

- + 

- 

 + 

- + 

## A B C D 

- 

- – 

- – – – – 

- 

8 Benzene is a liquid with molecular formula C 6 H 6. Ethene is a gas with molecular formula C 2 H 4. Which statement is correct? A 1 mole of benzene and 1 mole of ethene contain the same number of atoms. B 1 mole of benzene and 1 mole of ethene both have a volume of 24 dm^3 at room temperature and pressure. C Both benzene and ethene have the same empirical formula. D The number of carbon atoms in 0.5 moles of ethene is equal to the Avogadro constant. 

9 Sodium hydrogencarbonate undergoes thermal decomposition as shown. 2NaHCO 3 → Na 2 CO 3 + CO 2 + H 2 O What is the maximum mass of sodium carbonate that can be made from 0.100 moles ofsodium hydrogencarbonate? A 4.15 g B 5.30 g C 10.6 g D 21.2 g 


© UCLES 2016 0620/21/O/N/16 

10 Which apparatus could be used to electroplate an iron nail with copper? 

## + – 

## A 

## + – 

## B 

## + – 

## C D 

# aqueous copper(II) sulfate 

# aqueous iron(II) sulfate 

## + – 

 key = copper sheet 

 = iron nail 


© UCLES 2016 0620/21/O/N/16 [Turn over 

11 The diagram shows a simple cell. 

 electrolyte 

 metal X metal Y 

 voltmeter V 

 Which two metals produce the highest reading on the voltmeter? X Y A magnesium copper B magnesium iron C zinc copper D zinc iron 

# 12 When anhydrous copper(II) sulfate is added to water a solution is formed and heat is given out. 

 water 

 anhydrous 

# copper(II) sulfate 

 thermometer 

 Which row shows the temperature change and the type of reaction taking place? temperature change type of reaction A decrease endothermic B decrease exothermic C increase endothermic D increase exothermic 


© UCLES 2016 0620/21/O/N/16 

13 The energy level diagram for a reaction is shown. 

 energy products reactants 

 E a Δ H 

 Which statement is not correct for this energy level diagram? A It could be the energy level diagram for the reaction when petrol is burnt. B Less energy is released in bond forming than is needed for bond breaking. C The activation energy, Ea, has a positive value. D The energy change, ∆H, for the reaction is positive. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/21/O/N/16 [Turn over 

14 The rate of reaction between magnesium and excess dilute hydrochloric acid was followed bymeasuring the mass of magnesium present at regular time intervals. 

 Two experiments were performed. Both experiments used 0.1 g of magnesium ribbon. The acid in experiment 1 was less concentrated than in experiment 2. Which graph shows the results of the experiments? A 

 mass of magnesium 

 time 

 C 

 mass of magnesium 

 time 

## 1 

## 2 

## 2 

## 1 

## B 

 mass of magnesium 

 time 

 D 

## 0 

## 0 

## 0 

## 0 

## 0 

## 0 

## 0 

## 0 

 mass of magnesium 

 time 

## 2 

## 1 

## 1 

## 2 

15 Which statement explains why coal dust forms an explosive mixture with air? A Coal dust catalyses the explosion. B Coal dust has a large surface area. C Crushing coal increases the concentration of the coal. D Crushing coal increases the temperature of the coal. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/21/O/N/16 

16 The following reversible reaction takes place in a closed vessel at constant temperature. P(g) + Q(g) + R(g) S(g) + T(g) When the system has reached equilibrium, more T is added. After the addition of T, which substances increase in concentration? A P, Q, R and S B P and Q only C P, Q and R only D S only 

17 Four ionic half-equations are shown. 1 Cu2+(aq) + 2e–^ → Cu(s) 2 2 I–(aq) → I 2 (aq) + 2e– 3 Fe2+(aq) → Fe3+(aq) + e– 4 Cl 2 (g) + 2e–^ → 2Cl – (aq) Which statement is correct? 

# A In equation 1, copper(II) ions are oxidised to copper. 

 B In equation 2, iodide ions are reduced to iodine. 

# C In equation 3, iron(II) ions are oxidised to iron(III) ions. 

 D In equation 4, chlorine is oxidised to chloride ions. 

18 Germanium oxide is a white powder. Germanium oxide reacts with concentrated hydrochloric acid. Germanium oxide reacts with concentrated aqueous sodium hydroxide. Germanium oxide does not dissolve when added to water. Which type of oxide is germanium oxide? A acidic B amphoteric C basic D neutral 


© UCLES 2016 0620/21/O/N/16 [Turn over 

19 Hydrogen chloride gas reacts with water to produce an acidic solution. The equation for thereaction is shown. 

 HCl + H 2 O → Cl –^ + H 3 O+ Which statement describes what happens during the reaction? A The chloride ion is formed by accepting an electron from the water. B The hydrogen chloride loses an electron to form the chloride ion. C The water accepts a proton from the hydrogen chloride. D The water donates a proton to the hydrogen chloride. 

# 20 The apparatus shown is used to prepare aqueous copper(II) sulfate. 

## Y 

 stirrer solid X 

 aqueous 

# copper(II) sulfate 

 excess of solid X 

 filter paper 

 heat What are X and Y? X Y 

# A copper aqueous iron(II) sulfate 

# B copper(II) chloride sulfuric acid 

# C copper(II) oxide sulfuric acid 

# D sulfur aqueous copper(II) chloride 


© UCLES 2016 0620/21/O/N/16 

21 Information about some silver compounds is shown in the table. 

 compound formula solubility in water silver carbonate Ag 2 CO 3 insoluble silver chloride AgCl insoluble silver nitrate AgNO 3 soluble silver oxide Ag 2 O insoluble Which equation shows a reaction which cannot be used to make a silver salt? A AgNO 3 (aq) + HCl (aq) → AgCl (s) + HNO 3 (aq) B Ag 2 O(s) + 2HNO 3 (aq) → 2AgNO 3 (aq) + H 2 O(l) C Ag 2 CO 3 (s) + 2HNO 3 (aq) → 2AgNO 3 (aq) + H 2 O(l) + CO 2 (g) D 2Ag(s) + 2HCl (aq) → 2AgCl (s) + H 2 (g) 

22 What is not a property of Group I metals? A They are soft and can be cut with a knife. B They react when exposed to oxygen in the air. C They produce an acidic solution when they react with water. D They react rapidly with water producing hydrogen gas. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/21/O/N/16 [Turn over 

23 Four substances, P, Q, R and S, are tested as shown. 

test (^) P Q substance R S dilute hydrochloricacid added which ‘pops’ withgas given off a lighted splint gas given off which turns limewater milky no reaction^ no reaction dilute aqueous sodium hydroxideadded and warmed gently no reaction no reaction gas given off damp, red litmuswhich turns paper blue no reaction What are P, Q, R and S? P Q R S A Mg Na 2 CO 3 NH 4 Cl NaCl B Mg NH 4 Cl Na 2 CO 3 NaCl C Mg Na 2 CO 3 NaCl NH 4 Cl D Na 2 CO 3 Mg NaCl NH 4 Cl 24 Which statement about transition elements and their compounds is correct? A All the transition elements have an oxidation state of +2 only. B Aqueous solutions of the salts of transition elements are generally coloured. C Transition elements change from metal to non-metal across the period. D Transition elements can act as catalysts but their compounds cannot. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/21/O/N/16 

25 Impure iron from the blast furnace is converted to steel as shown. oxygen 

 impure molten iron 

 Which statement about the process is correct? A Acidic oxides are added to remove alkaline impurities. B Coke is added as a reducing agent. C Oxygen is blown in to oxidise the impure iron. D The steel produced contains less carbon than the impure iron. 

26 The ionic equations represent the reactions between four metals, P, Q, R and S, and solutions of the salts of the same metals. P + Q2+^ → no reaction R + P2+^ → R2+^ + P Q + S2+^ → Q2+^ + S S + P2+^ → S2+^ + P S + R2+^ → S2+^ + R S + Q2+^ → no reaction What is the correct order of reactivity of the metals? most least A P R S Q B Q R S P C Q S R P D S Q P R 


© UCLES 2016 0620/21/O/N/16 [Turn over 

27 Aluminium is extracted by electrolysis. From which ore is aluminium extracted and at which electrode is aluminium deposited during electrolysis? ore electrode A bauxite negative B bauxite positive C cryolite negative D cryolite positive 

28 Zinc oxide can be reacted with carbon to produce zinc metal. Which equation for this reaction is correct? A 2ZnO + C → 2Zn + CO B 2ZnO + 2C → 2Zn + 2CO 2 C ZnO + C → Zn + CO D ZnO + 2C → Zn + 2CO 2 

29 Air is a mixture of gases. Which gas is present in the largest amount? A argon B carbon dioxide C nitrogen D oxygen 

30 Which information about carbon dioxide and methane is correct? 

 carbon dioxide methane A formed when vegetation decomposes   key B greenhouse gas    = true C present in unpolluted air    = false D produced during respiration   


© UCLES 2016 0620/21/O/N/16 

31 Underwater steel pipes can be protected from corrosion by attaching magnesium blocks to them. Which equation represents the reaction that prevents corrosion? A Fe → Fe2+^ + 2e– B Fe2+^ → Fe3+^ + e– C Mg → Mg2+^ + 2e– D Mg2+^ + 2e–^ → Mg 

32 Ammonia is manufactured by the Haber process. The reaction is exothermic. N 2 (g) + 3H 2 (g) 2NH 3 (g) ∆H = –92 kJ / mol Which statement about the Haber process is correct? A The reaction is irreversible and produces only one product. B The reaction is reversible and produces less ammonia at high pressure. C The reaction is reversible and produces less ammonia at high temperature. D The reaction is slow because a catalyst is not used in the Haber process. 

33 Sulfuric acid is manufactured by the Contact process. The most important reaction takes place in the presence of a catalyst. What are the reactants and the catalyst for this reaction? reactants catalyst 

# A sulfur and oxygen vanadium(V) oxide 

# B sulfur dioxide and oxygen vanadium(V) oxide 

 C sulfur dioxide and steam iron D sulfur trioxide and water platinum 


© UCLES 2016 0620/21/O/N/16 [Turn over 

34 Which box corresponds to limestone? 

 Does limestone contain carbon? 

 yes no 

 yes no 

 Does limestone burn? Does limestone burn? 

## A B 

 yes no C D 

35 Petroleum is an important fossil fuel. Which row correctly describes petroleum? type of substance composition A compound mainly hydrocarbons B compound only hydrogen and carbon C mixture mainly hydrocarbons D mixture only hydrogen and carbon 

36 Butane reacts as shown. 

butane (^) and heatcatalyst butene + hydrogen What is this type of reaction? A combustion B cracking C polymerisation D reduction 


© UCLES 2016 0620/21/O/N/16 

37 Substance Z has the following characteristics. 1 It burns in an excess of oxygen to form carbon dioxide and water. 2 It is oxidised by air to form a liquid smelling of vinegar. 3 It reacts with carboxylic acids to form esters. What is substance Z? A ethane B ethanoic acid C ethanol D ethyl ethanoate 

38 Ethanol is manufactured by the catalytic addition of steam to ethene and by fermentation. Which row shows an advantage and a disadvantage of using the catalytic addition of steam toethene compared to fermentation? 

 advantage disadvantage A fast the product is impure B fast uses non-renewable materials C the product is pure slow D uses renewable materials slow 

39 The partial structure of addition polymer X is shown. 

 C 

CH (^3) H 

## C 

## H 

CH (^3) 

## C 

CH (^3) H 

## C 

## H 

CH (^3) Which monomer is used to form polymer X? A CH 2 =CH 2 B CH 3 CH=CH 2 C CH 3 CH=CHCH 3 D CH 3 CH 2 CH=CH 2 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeInternational Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge LocalExaminations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2016 0620/21/O/N/16 

40 The diagram shows the partial structure of Terylene. 

 C 

## O 

## C C 

## O O 

## O O O 

 From which pair of compounds is it made? 

## C 

## O 

## C 

## O 

## HO OH HO OH 

## C + 

## O 

## C 

## O 

## HO OH 

## C 

## O 

## C 

## O 

## HO OH C 

## O 

## C 

## O 

## HO OH 

## A HO OH 

## C 

## O 

## HO OH + C 

## O 

## B HO OH 

## C + 

## D + 


© UCLES 2016 0620/21/O/N/16 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements^1 Hhydrogen^1 

(^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Beberyllium 9 atomic number atomic symbol **Key**^ name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mgmagnesium 24 19 Kpotassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Srstrontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Gegermanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 22 Tititanium (^4840) Zrzirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rfrutherfordium– 23 Vvanadium (^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Crchromium (^5242) Momolybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sgseaborgium– (^25) Mnmanganese (^5543) Tctechnetium– (^75) Rerhenium (^186107) Bhbohrium– (^26) Feiron (^5644) Ruruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Iriridium (^192109) Mtmeitnerium– (^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pdpalladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Dsdarmstadtium– (^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rgroentgenium– (^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cdcadmium (^11280) Hgmercury (^201112) Cncopernicium– 114 F _l_ flerovium– 116 Lvlivermorium– (^7) Nnitrogen 1415 Pphosphorus (^3133) Asarsenic (^7551) Sbantimony 12283 Bibismuth 209 (^8) Ooxygen 1616 Ssulfur (^3234) Seselenium (^7952) Tetellurium (^12884) Popolonium– (^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Brbromine 8053 I iodine 12785 Atastatine– (^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Scscandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) Lalanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.) actinium– (^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium^141 (^91) Paprotactinium 231 (^60) Ndneodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pmpromethium– (^93) Npneptunium– (^62) Smsamarium (^15094) Puplutonium– (^63) Eueuropium (^15295) Amamericium– (^64) Gdgadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bkberkelium– (^66) Dydysprosium 16398 Cfcalifornium– (^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Eseinsteinium– (^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Mdmendelevium– (^70) Ybytterbium (^173102) Nonobelium– (^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lrlawrencium– 


