 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all questions. Electronic calculators may be used. You may lose marks if you do not show your working or if you do not use appropriate units. Practical notes are provided on pages 11 and 12. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. 

 CHEMISTRY 0620/51 Paper 5 Practical Test October/November 2016 1 hour 15 minutes Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: As listed in the Confidential Instructions 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

 This document consists of 10 printed pages and 2 blank pages. 

 [Turn over 

 IB16 11_0620_51/3RP © UCLES 2016 

# *4268017354* 

 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 For Examiner’s Use 

 Total 


**1** You are going to investigate what happens when nitric acid reacts with aqueous solutions of two different alkalis, solution **N** and solution **O**. 

 Read all the instructions carefully before starting the experiments. 

 Instructions You are going to carry out two experiments. 

 (a) Experiment 1 

 Use a measuring cylinder to pour 50 cm^3 of solution^ N^ into the polystyrene cup provided. Put the polystyrene cup into a 250 cm^3 beaker for support. Measure the initial temperature of the solution and record it in the first row of the table. Fill the burette with nitric acid to the 0.0 cm^3 mark. Add 5.0 cm 3 of nitric acid to solution N in the polystyrene cup and stir the solution. Measure and record the maximum temperature of the solution in the table. Add a further 5.0 cm 3 of nitric acid to the polystyrene cup and stir the solution. Measure and record the maximum temperature of the solution in the table. Continue to add 5.0 cm 3 portions of nitric acid to the polystyrene cup, until a total volume of 40 cm 3 of nitric acid has been added. Stir after each addition and measure and record the maximum temperatures in the table. 

 Pour the solution away and rinse the polystyrene cup. 

 volume of nitric acid added / cm^3 

 maximum temperature of the solution in the polystyrene cup / °C 

## 0.0 

## 5.0 

## 10.0 

## 15.0 

## 20.0 

## 25.0 

## 30.0 

## 35.0 

## 40.0 

## [2] 


© UCLES 2016 0620/51/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

 (b) Experiment 2 

 Refill the burette with nitric acid. Repeat Experiment 1 using solution O instead of solution N. Record your results in the table. 

 volume of nitric acid added / cm^3 

 maximum temperature of the solution in the polystyrene cup / °C 

## 0.0 

## 5.0 

## 10.0 

## 15.0 

## 20.0 

## 25.0 

## 30.0 

## 35.0 

## 40.0 

## [2] 


 (c) Plot the results for Experiments 1 and 2 on the grid and draw two smooth line graphs. Clearly label your graphs. 

## 0 10 20 

 volume of nitric acid added / cm^3 

maximum temperature of solution / °C 

## 30 40 

## 40 

## 30 

## 20 

## 10 

## [4] 

 (d) Use your graph to estimate the maximum temperature of the solution when 13 cm^3 of nitric acid were added to 50 cm 3 of solution N in Experiment 1. 

 Show clearly on the grid how you worked out your answer. 

 .............................. °C [2] 


© UCLES 2016 0620/51/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

 (e) Name a suitable indicator that could be used in Experiment 1. 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

 (f) Solution N and solution O are the same concentration. 

 In which experiment is the temperature change greater? Suggest why the temperature change is greater in this experiment. 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [2] 

 (g) How would the results differ in Experiment 1 if 100 cm^3 of solution N were used? 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

 (h) Suggest why a polystyrene cup is used in these experiments and not a copper can. 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

 (i) State one source of error in the experiments. Suggest an improvement to reduce this source of error. 

 source of error ........................................................................................................................... 

 improvement .............................................................................................................................. [2] 

 [Total: 17] 


**2** You are provided with solid **P** , which is a metallic salt. Carry out the following tests on solid **P** , recording all of your observations at each stage. 

 tests on solid P 

 (a) Describe the appearance of solid P. 

## .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

 (b) Use a spatula to divide solid P into three portions. 

 (i) test 1 Heat the first portion of solid P in a hard-glass test-tube. 

# Test any gases given off with cobalt(II) chloride paper. 

 Record your observations. 

 ............................................................................................................................................. 

 ............................................................................................................................................. 

## ....................................................................................................................................... [3] 

 (ii) test 2 Carry out a flame test on the second portion of solid P. Record your observations. 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [1] 

 tests on a solution of P 

 Add about 10 cm 3 of distilled water to the third portion of solid P in a test-tube. Stopper the test-tube and shake it to dissolve solid P. 

 (c) Divide the solution into four equal portions in four test-tubes. Carry out the following tests. 

 (i) To the first portion of the solution, add several drops of aqueous sodium hydroxide. Then add excess aqueous sodium hydroxide to the mixture. Record your observations. 

## ............................................................................................................................................. 

## ............................................................................................................................................. 

## ....................................................................................................................................... [3] 

 (ii) To the second portion of the solution, add excess aqueous ammonia. Record your observations. 

## ............................................................................................................................................ 

## ....................................................................................................................................... [1] 


© UCLES 2016 0620/51/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

 (iii) To the third portion of the solution, add a few drops of dilute nitric acid and about 1 cm^3 of aqueous silver nitrate. Record your observations. 

 ....................................................................................................................................... [1] 

 (iv) To the fourth portion of the solution, add a few drops of dilute nitric acid and about 1 cm^3 of aqueous barium nitrate. Record your observations. 

 ............................................................................................................................................. 

## ....................................................................................................................................... [2] 

 (d) Solid P contains a metal ion. 

 Suggest what the appearance of solid P in (a) tells you about the identity of the metal ion. 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

 (e) What does test 1 tell you about solid P? 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

 (f) What does test 2 tell you about solid P? 

 .............................................................................................................................................. [1] 

 (g) Identify solid P. 

 .................................................................................................................................................... 

## .............................................................................................................................................. [2] 

 [Total: 17] 


**3** Agri Limes are mixtures of calcium carbonate and calcium oxide. Farmers use Agri Limes on fields to neutralise acidity. 

 Plan an investigation to find out which of two different Agri Limes, Q or R , will neutralise more acid. You are provided with common laboratory apparatus and chemicals, including dilute nitric acid. 

## ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ........................................................................................................................................................... 

## ..................................................................................................................................................... [6] 

 [Total: 6] 


## BLANK PAGE 


## BLANK PAGE 


## NOTES FOR USE IN QUALITATIVE ANALYSIS 

**Test for anions** 

 anion test test result 

 carbonate (CO 3 2–^ ) add dilute acid effervescence, carbon dioxide produced 

 chloride (C l –^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify with dilute nitric acid, then add aqueous silver nitrate 

 white ppt. 

 bromide (Br –^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify with dilute nitric acid, then add aqueous silver nitrate 

 cream ppt. 

 iodide (I–^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify with dilute nitric acid, then add aqueous silver nitrate 

 yellow ppt. 

 nitrate (NO 3 –^ ) [in solution] 

 add aqueous sodium hydroxide then aluminium foil; warm carefully 

 ammonia produced 

 sulfate (SO 4 2–^ ) [in solution] 

 acidify, then add aqueous barium nitrate 

 white ppt. 

 sulfite (SO 3 2–^ ) add dilute hydrochloric acid, warm gently and test for the presence of sulfur dioxide 

 sulfur dioxide produced will turn acidified aqueous potassium 

# manganate(VII) from purple to 

 colourless 

**Test for aqueous cations** 

 cation effect of aqueous sodium hydroxide effect of aqueous ammonia 

 aluminium (A l 3+^ ) white ppt., soluble in excess giving a colourless solution 

 white ppt., insoluble in excess 

 ammonium (NH 4 +^ ) ammonia produced on warming – 

 calcium (Ca 2+^ ) white ppt., insoluble in excess no ppt. or very slight white ppt. 

# chromium(III) (Cr 3+^ ) green ppt., soluble in excess grey-green ppt., insoluble in excess 

 copper (Cu 2+^ ) light blue ppt., insoluble in excess light blue ppt., soluble in excess giving a dark blue solution 

# iron(II) (Fe2+^ ) green ppt., insoluble in excess green ppt., insoluble in excess 

# iron(III) (Fe3+^ ) red-brown ppt., insoluble in excess red-brown ppt., insoluble in excess 

 zinc (Zn2+^ ) white ppt., soluble in excess giving a colourless solution 

 white ppt., soluble in excess, giving a colourless solution 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

**Test for gases Flame tests for metal ions** 

 gas test and test results metal ion flame colour 

 ammonia (NH 3 ) turns damp, red litmus paper blue lithium (Li +) red 

 carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) turns limewater milky sodium (Na +) yellow 

chlorine (C _l_ (^) 2 ) bleaches damp litmus paper potassium (K+) lilac 

# hydrogen (H 2 ) ‘pops’ with a lighted splint copper(II) (Cu 2+^ ) blue-green 

 oxygen (O 2 ) relights a glowing splint 

 sulfur dioxide (SO 2 ) turns acidified aqueous 

# potassium manganate(VII) from 

 purple to colourless 


