 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 17 printed pages and 3 blank pages. IB16 11_0620_22/6RP© UCLES 2016 [Turn over 

# *3303892045* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/22 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) October/November 2016 Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet^ 45 minutes Soft clean eraserSoft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid.Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you.DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

There areanswers A (^) ,forty B, C questions on this paper. Answerand D. all questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet.A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 20. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/22/O/N/16 

1 ‘Particlesconcentration.’ moving very slowly from an area of higher concentration to an area of lower 

 Which process is being described? A a liquid being frozen B a solid melting C a substance diffusing through a liquid D a substance diffusing through the air 

2 A student mixes 25 cm^3 samples of dilute hydrochloric acid with different volumes of aqueous sodium hydroxide. In each case, the student measures the change in temperature to test if the reaction is exothermic. Which piece of apparatus is not needed? 

 burette clock pipette thermometer 

## A B C D 

3 A sample contains a mixture of powdered limestone (calcium carbonate), sugar and wax. What is the correct way to obtain a pure sample of sugar? A Dissolve the mixture in dilute hydrochloric acid, filter and wash the residue. B Dissolve the mixture in hexane, filter and evaporate the filtrate. C Dissolve the mixture in water, filter and evaporate the filtrate. D Dissolve the mixture in water, filter and wash the residue. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/22/O/N/16 [Turn over 

4 The table shows information about four different particles. 

particle (^) numberproton nucleonnumber of protonsnumber of neutronsnumber of electronsnumber Na 11 23 11 W 11 Na+^11 23 11 12 X O 8 16 8 Y 8 O2–^8 16 8 8 Z What are the values of W, X, Y and Z? W X Y Z A 11 10 10 8 B 11 11 8 10 C 12 10 8 10 D 12 11 10 8 5 In which ionic compound do the metal ion and the non-metal ion have the same electronic structure? A CaO B KBr C MgO D NaCl 


© UCLES 2016 0620/22/O/N/16 

6 The structure of methanal is shown. 

 C O 

## H 

## H 

 Which diagram shows the arrangement of outer shell electrons in a molecule of methanal? 

## C O 

## H 

## H 

## A 

## C O 

## H 

## H 

## B 

## C O 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## C O 

## H 

## H 

## D 

7 Iron is a metal. Its structure consists of a giant lattice of positive ions in a ‘sea of electrons’. Which statements about solid iron are correct? 1 Iron conducts electricity because the electrons are free to move. 2 Iron conducts heat because the positive ions are free to move. 3 Iron has a high melting point due to the strong covalent bonds. 4 Iron is malleable because the layers of ions can slide over one another. A 1 and 3 B 1 and 4 C 1 only D 2, 3 and 4 


© UCLES 2016 0620/22/O/N/16 [Turn over 

8 Which sample contains the greatest number of molecules? A 4 g of hydrogen B 18 g of water C 24 dm^3 of oxygen D 66 g of carbon dioxide 

9 Sodium carbonate solution reacts with dilute hydrochloric acid. The equation for the reaction is shown. Na 2 CO 3 (aq) + 2HCl (aq) → 2NaCl (aq) + CO 2 (g) + H 2 O(l) Excess sodium carbonate is added to 10.0 cm^3 of 0.10 mol / dm^3 hydrochloric acid. Which volume of carbon dioxide gas is made? A 12 cm^3 B 24 cm^3 C 12 000 cm^3 D 24 000 cm^3 

10 Which apparatus could be used to electroplate an iron nail with copper? 

## + – 

## A 

## + – 

## B 

## + – 

## C D 

# aqueous copper(II) sulfate 

# aqueous iron(II) sulfate 

## + – 

 key = copper sheet 

 = iron nail 


© UCLES 2016 0620/22/O/N/16 

11 A student sets up a number of simple cells by putting strips of two different metals into dilutesulfuric acid. 

 Which cell produces the highest voltage? A copper and magnesium B copper and zinc C iron and copper D magnesium and zinc 

12 Which experiment is the most exothermic? 

 initial temperature / °C final temperature / °C A 20 5 B 20 32 C 25 12 D 25 34 

13 The energy level diagram for a reaction is shown. 

 reactants 

 products 

## Δ H 

 E a energy 

 Which row is correct? sign of ∆H overall energy change sign of Ea A – exothermic – B + endothermic + C + endothermic – D – exothermic + 


© UCLES 2016 0620/22/O/N/16 [Turn over 

14 Zinc granules are reacted with excess dilute hydrochloric acid. The volume of hydrogen given off is measured at different times. The results are shown on the graph, labelled experiment 1. The results for a second experiment are also shown on the graph, labelled experiment 2. 

(^00) time volume of hydrogen experiment 1 experiment 2 Which change to the conditions was made in experiment 2? A The concentration of the hydrochloric acid was decreased. B The size of the zinc granules was decreased. C The surface area of the zinc granules was increased. D The temperature was increased. 15 In an experiment nitric acid is added to excess marble chips and the volume of carbon dioxide formed is measured. The experiment is repeated using smaller marble chips. All other conditions remain the same. Which statement about the second experiment is correct? A The collisions are more frequent and higher energy. B The collisions are more frequent and the same energy. C The collisions are the same frequency and the same energy. D The collisions are the same frequency and higher energy. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/22/O/N/16 

16 At 400exothermic. °C the reaction between hydrogen and iodine reaches an equilibrium. The reaction is 

 H 2 (g) + I 2 (g) 2HI(g) ∆H = –13 kJ / mol Which change in conditions would increase the percentage of hydrogen iodide in the equilibriummixture? A a decrease in pressure B a decrease in temperature C an increase in pressure D an increase in temperature 

# 17 Chromium forms the compound chromium(III) sulfate. 

# What does the (III) represent? 

 A the charge on a sulfate ion B the number of chromium ions combined with one sulfate ion C the number of sulfate ions combined with one chromium ion D the oxidation state of chromium 

18 Germanium oxide is a white powder. Germanium oxide reacts with concentrated hydrochloric acid. Germanium oxide reacts with concentrated aqueous sodium hydroxide. Germanium oxide does not dissolve when added to water. Which type of oxide is germanium oxide? A acidic B amphoteric C basic D neutral 


© UCLES 2016 0620/22/O/N/16 [Turn over 

19 Hydrogen chloride gas reacts with water to produce an acidic solution. The equation for thereaction is shown. 

 HCl + H 2 O → Cl –^ + H 3 O+ Which statement describes what happens during the reaction? A The chloride ion is formed by accepting an electron from the water. B The hydrogen chloride loses an electron to form the chloride ion. C The water accepts a proton from the hydrogen chloride. D The water donates a proton to the hydrogen chloride. 

# 20 The apparatus shown is used to prepare aqueous copper(II) sulfate. 

## Y 

 stirrer solid X 

 aqueous 

# copper(II) sulfate 

 excess of solid X 

 filter paper 

 heat What are X and Y? X Y 

# A copper aqueous iron(II) sulfate 

# B copper(II) chloride sulfuric acid 

# C copper(II) oxide sulfuric acid 

# D sulfur aqueous copper(II) chloride 


© UCLES 2016 0620/22/O/N/16 

21 Information about some silver compounds is shown in the table. 

 compound formula solubility in water silver carbonate Ag 2 CO 3 insoluble silver chloride AgCl insoluble silver nitrate AgNO 3 soluble silver oxide Ag 2 O insoluble Which equation shows a reaction which cannot be used to make a silver salt? A AgNO 3 (aq) + HCl (aq) → AgCl (s) + HNO 3 (aq) B Ag 2 O(s) + 2HNO 3 (aq) → 2AgNO 3 (aq) + H 2 O(l) C Ag 2 CO 3 (s) + 2HNO 3 (aq) → 2AgNO 3 (aq) + H 2 O(l) + CO 2 (g) D 2Ag(s) + 2HCl (aq) → 2AgCl (s) + H 2 (g) 

22 What is not a property of Group I metals? A They are soft and can be cut with a knife. B They react when exposed to oxygen in the air. C They produce an acidic solution when they react with water. D They react rapidly with water producing hydrogen gas. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/22/O/N/16 [Turn over 

23 AqueousW, X, Y and Z. sodium hydroxide was added slowly, until in excess, to separate solutions of 

 The results are shown. 

solution (^) aqueous sodium hydroxideinitial observation with final observation with excessaqueous sodium hydroxide W white precipitate formed precipitate dissolves X white precipitate formed no change Y pale blue precipitate formed no change Z green precipitate formed no change Which row identifies the metal ions in the solutions? metal ion in solution W metal ion in solution X metal ion in solution Y metal ion in solution Z 

# A aluminium calcium copper(II) iron(II) 

# B aluminium calcium iron(II) copper(II) 

# C aluminium iron(II) calcium copper(II) 

# D calcium aluminium copper(II) iron(II) 

24 Part of the Periodic Table is shown. Which element has two electrons in its outer shell and three electron shells? 

 A B 

**C** (^) **D** 25 Impurities in iron obtained from the blast furnace include carbon, phosphorus and silicon. Which impurities are removed from the molten iron as gases when it is made into steel? A carbon and phosphorus B carbon and silicon C carbon only D phosphorus and silicon 


© UCLES 2016 0620/22/O/N/16 

26 Y displaces X from its aqueous sulfate. X does not displace W from its aqueous sulfate. X displaces Z from its aqueous sulfate. What is the order of reactivity of elements W, X, Y and Z? 

 reactive^ most reactiveleast A W X Y Z B W Y X Z C Z X Y W D Z W Y X 

27 Which statement about the industrial extraction of aluminium from aluminium oxide is correct? A Aluminium is extracted by heating its oxide with carbon. B Aluminium is extracted using electrolysis and is collected at the anode. C Aluminium is extracted using platinum electrodes and direct current. D Molten cryolite is used as a solvent for aluminium oxide. 

28 The alloy brass is a mixture of copper and another metal. Brass is used to make the pins of electrical plugs. Copper is used to make electrical wiring. Which row about brass is correct? 

hardness (^) conductivityelectrical other metal A harder than copper better than copper tin B harder than copper worse than copper zinc C softer than copper better than copper tin D softer than copper worse than copper zinc 


© UCLES 2016 0620/22/O/N/16 [Turn over 

29 Air is a mixture of gases. Which gas is present in the largest amount? A argon B carbon dioxide C nitrogen D oxygen 

30 Which information about carbon dioxide and methane is correct? 

 carbon dioxide methane A formed when vegetation decomposes   key B greenhouse gas    = true C present in unpolluted air    = false D produced during respiration   

31 Boats made from steel can be protected from rusting by attaching blocks of a more reactive metalto the hull of the boat. 

 hull 

 block of a more reactive metal 

 Which statement is correct? A Copper is used for the blocks because it does not react with water. B Magnesium is not used for the blocks because it reacts with steel. C The metal used for the blocks loses electrons more easily than steel. D This form of protection from rusting is called galvanising. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/22/O/N/16 

32 Ammonia is manufactured by the Haber process, using an iron catalyst. N 2 + 3H 2 2NH 3 It is not possible to obtain 100% yield. What is the reason for this? A A high pressure is used. B Ammonia decomposes at high temperature. C Some of the ammonia is recycled. D The ammonia reacts with the catalyst. 

33 Sulfuric acid is manufactured by a series of chemical reactions, one of which is catalysed by 

# vanadium(V) oxide. 

# What is the equation for the reaction catalysed by vanadium(V) oxide? 

## A S + O 2 → SO 2 

## B 2S + 3O 2 → 2SO 3 

## C 2SO 2 + O 2 → 2SO 3 

## D SO 3 + H 2 O → H 2 SO 4 

34 Which substance gives off carbon dioxide on heating? A lime B limestone C limewater D slaked lime 

35 Petroleum is separated into fractions. Which statement is not correct? A Each fraction contains a mixture of hydrocarbon molecules. B Fuel oil burns easily and is used as fuel in cars. C Refinery gas is the fraction containing the smallest molecules. D The fractions are separated depending on their boiling point range. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/22/O/N/16 [Turn over 

36 Butane reacts as shown. 

butane (^) and heatcatalyst butene + hydrogen What is this type of reaction? A combustion B cracking C polymerisation D reduction 37 Substance Z has the following characteristics. 1 It burns in an excess of oxygen to form carbon dioxide and water. 2 It is oxidised by air to form a liquid smelling of vinegar. 3 It reacts with carboxylic acids to form esters. What is substance Z? A ethane B ethanoic acid C ethanol D ethyl ethanoate 38 Ethanol is manufactured by the catalytic addition of steam to ethene and by fermentation. Which row shows an advantage and a disadvantage of using the catalytic addition of steam to ethene compared to fermentation? advantage disadvantage A fast the product is impure B fast uses non-renewable materials C the product is pure slow D uses renewable materials slow 


© UCLES 2016 0620/22/O/N/16 

39 Chloroethene, CH 2 =CHCl , can be polymerised. Which diagram represents a section of the polymer? 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## C 

## H 

 C l C l C l C H 

## C 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## C 

## H 

 C l C l C l C l C l 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

 C l C l C 

## H H 

## C 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## C 

## H 

 C l 

 C l C l 

 C l C l 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

 C l 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

 C l 

## A B 

## C D 

40 Terylene is a synthetic polymer. Which statement about Terylene is not correct? A It contains amide linkages. B It contains carbon and oxygen atoms. C It is made from small units called monomers. D It is formed by condensation polymerisation. 


## BLANK PAGE 

© UCLES 2016 0620/22/O/N/16 


## BLANK PAGE 

© UCLES 2016 0620/22/O/N/16 


## BLANK PAGE 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeInternational Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge LocalExaminations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2016 0620/22/O/N/16 


© UCLES 2016 0620/22/O/N/16 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements^1 Hhydrogen^1 

(^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Beberyllium 9 atomic number atomic symbol **Key**^ name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mgmagnesium 24 19 Kpotassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Srstrontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Gegermanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 22 Tititanium (^4840) Zrzirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rfrutherfordium– 23 Vvanadium (^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Crchromium (^5242) Momolybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sgseaborgium– (^25) Mnmanganese (^5543) Tctechnetium– (^75) Rerhenium (^186107) Bhbohrium– (^26) Feiron (^5644) Ruruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Iriridium (^192109) Mtmeitnerium– (^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pdpalladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Dsdarmstadtium– (^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rgroentgenium– (^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cdcadmium (^11280) Hgmercury (^201112) Cncopernicium– 114 F _l_ flerovium– 116 Lvlivermorium– (^7) Nnitrogen 1415 Pphosphorus (^3133) Asarsenic (^7551) Sbantimony 12283 Bibismuth 209 (^8) Ooxygen 1616 Ssulfur (^3234) Seselenium (^7952) Tetellurium (^12884) Popolonium– (^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Brbromine 8053 I iodine 12785 Atastatine– (^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Scscandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) Lalanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.) actinium– (^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium^141 (^91) Paprotactinium 231 (^60) Ndneodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pmpromethium– (^93) Npneptunium– (^62) Smsamarium (^15094) Puplutonium– (^63) Eueuropium (^15295) Amamericium– (^64) Gdgadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bkberkelium– (^66) Dydysprosium 16398 Cfcalifornium– (^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Eseinsteinium– (^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Mdmendelevium– (^70) Ybytterbium (^173102) Nonobelium– (^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lrlawrencium– 


