 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 17 printed pages and 3 blank pages. IB16 11_0620_13/6RP© UCLES 2016 [Turn over 

# *3471311180* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/13 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) October/November 2016 Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet^ 45 minutes Soft clean eraserSoft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil.Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unlessthis has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

There areanswers **A** (^) , **forty B** , **C** questions on this paper. Answerand **D**. **all** questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the **one** you consider correct and record your choice in **soft pencil** on the separate Answer Sheet. **Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully.** Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer.Any rough working should be done in this booklet. A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 20.Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/13/O/N/16 

**1** ‘Particlesconcentration.’ moving **very slowly** from an area of higher concentration to an area of lower 

 Which process is being described? A a liquid being frozen B a solid melting C a substance diffusing through a liquid D a substance diffusing through the air 

**2** A student mixes 25 cm^3 samples of dilute hydrochloric acid with different volumes of aqueous sodium hydroxide. In each case, the student measures the change in temperature to test if the reaction is exothermic. Which piece of apparatus is **not** needed? 

 burette clock pipette thermometer 

## A B C D 


© UCLES 2016 0620/13/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**3** A solid X is purified in five steps. The first four steps of the purification are shown in the diagram. 

 step 1 step 2 step 3 step 4 

 heat 

 solid X 

 mixture Y 

 In step 5 , how is a pure sample of solid X obtained from mixture Y? A dissolving B distillation C evaporating D filtering 

**4** An atom has three electron shells. There are three electrons in the outer shell. How many protons and how many neutrons are in this atom? protons neutrons **A** 13 14 **B** 13 27 **C** 14 13 **D** 21 24 

**5** Boron nitride is a compound of the elements boron and nitrogen. It has a similar structure to diamond. What is likely to be a property of boron nitride? **A** It conducts electricity. **B** It is soluble in water. **C** It is used as a lubricant. **D** It is very hard. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/13/O/N/16 

**6** Which row describes the formation of single covalent bonds in methane? 

 A atoms share a pair of electrons both atoms gain a noble gas electronic structure B atoms share a pair of electrons both atoms have the same number of electrons in their outer shell C electrons are transferred from one atom to another both atoms gain a noble gas electronic structure D electrons are transferred from one atom to another both atoms have the same number of electrons in their outer shell 

**7** Which elements are in the compound BaCO 3? **A** barium and cobalt **B** boron, actinium and oxygen **C** carbon, oxygen and barium **D** oxygen, calcium and boron 

**8** Concentrated aqueous sodium iodide is electrolysed using platinum electrodes. The solution contains the ions Na +, I–, H+^ and OH–. Which electrodes are the ions attracted to during this electrolysis? cathode anode **A** H+^ and Na +^ I–^ and OH – **B** H+^ and OH –^ I–^ and Na + **C** I–^ and Na +^ H+^ and OH – **D** I–^ and OH –^ H+^ and Na + 


© UCLES 2016 0620/13/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**9** Which apparatus could be used to electroplate an iron nail with copper? 

 + – 

## A 

## + – 

## B 

## + – 

## C D 

# aqueous copper(II) sulfate 

# aqueous iron(II) sulfate 

## + – 

 key = copper sheet 

 = iron nail 

**10** 10 g of ammonium nitrate are added to water at 25 °C and the mixture stirred. The ammonium nitrate dissolves and, after one minute, the temperature of the solution is 10 °C. Which word describes this change? **A** endothermic **B** exothermic **C** neutralisation **D** reduction 

**11** What is **always** produced when a fuel is burnt? **A** carbon dioxide **B** carbon monoxide **C** heat energy **D** oxides of nitrogen 


© UCLES 2016 0620/13/O/N/16 

**12** An experiment X is carried out between a solid and a solution using the apparatus shown. 

 gas syringe 

 The volume of gas given off is measured at different times and the results plotted on a graph. In a second experiment Y, the surface area of the solid is increased but all other factors remainthe same. Which graph shows the results of experiments X and Y? A 

 volume of gas 

(^00) time 

## Y 

## X 

## B 

 volume of gas 

(^00) time 

## Y 

## X 

## C 

 volume of gas 

(^00) time 

## Y 

## X 

## D 

 volume of gas 

(^00) time 

## Y 

## X 


© UCLES 2016 0620/13/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

# 13 Hydrated cobalt(II) chloride crystals are pink. 

# When they are heated, they lose water and form blue anhydrous cobalt(II) chloride. 

# hydrated cobalt(II) chloride anhydrous cobalt(II) chloride + water 

# A few drops of vinegar were added to anhydrous cobalt(II) chloride. 

 There was a colour change from blue to pink. What does this colour change show about vinegar? A It contains an acid. B It contains water. C It is an alkali. D It is anhydrous. 

**14** The equations for three reactions are shown. 1 CuO + H 2 → Cu + H 2 O 2 Fe 2 O 3 + 3CO → 2Fe + 3CO 2 3 2H 2 + O 2 → 2H 2 O Which statement about the reactions is **not** correct? 

# A In reaction 1, copper(II) oxide is reduced to copper. 

 B In reaction 2, carbon monoxide is oxidised to carbon dioxide. C In reactions 1 and 3, hydrogen is oxidised to water. 

# D In reaction 2, iron(III) oxide is oxidised to iron. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/13/O/N/16 

**15** Part of the Periodic Table is shown. 

## X Y 

 Which type of oxides do X and Y form? X Y A acidic acidic B acidic basic C basic acidic D basic basic 

**16** Compound T is added to dilute hydrochloric acid and warmed gently. 

# The mixture gives off a gas which turns acidified aqueous potassium manganate(VII) from purple 

 to colourless. A flame test on compound T gives a lilac flame. What is compound T? A sodium sulfate B sodium sulfite C potassium sulfate D potassium sulfite 

**17** Acids can react with metal oxides, carbonates and metals. Which reactions produce a gas? acid with metal oxide acid with carbonate acid with metal **A**    key **B**    = gas is produced **C**    = no gas is produced **D**    


© UCLES 2016 0620/13/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

# 18 The apparatus shown is used to prepare aqueous copper(II) sulfate. 

## Y 

 stirrer solid X 

 aqueous 

# copper(II) sulfate 

 excess of solid X 

 filter paper 

 heat What are X and Y? X Y 

# A copper aqueous iron(II) sulfate 

# B copper(II) chloride sulfuric acid 

# C copper(II) oxide sulfuric acid 

# D sulfur aqueous copper(II) chloride 

**19** Elements P and Q are in the same period of the Periodic Table. P is a metal and Q is a non-metal. Which statement is correct? **A** P has a greater nucleon number than Q. **B** P is to the right of Q in the period. **C** Q has more electron shells than P. **D** Q has more protons than P. 

**20** What is **not** a property of Group I metals? **A** They are soft and can be cut with a knife. **B** They react when exposed to oxygen in the air. **C** They produce an acidic solution when they react with water. **D** They react rapidly with water producing hydrogen gas. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/13/O/N/16 

**21** A flammable gas needs to be removed from a tank at an industrial plant. For safety reasons, an inert gas is used. Which gas is suitable? **A** argon **B** hydrogen **C** methane **D** oxygen 

**22** Which element is a transition element? 

 colour ofchloride melting point of element / °C A orange 113 B orange 1535 C white 113 D white 1535 

**23** Which statement about the element bromine is correct? **A** It displaces chlorine from aqueous potassium chloride. **B** It has a higher density than chlorine. **C** It is a diatomic metal. **D** It is a green gas at room temperature. 

**24** Four metals are listed in decreasing order of reactivity. magnesium zinc iron copper Titanium reacts with acid and cannot be extracted from its ore by heating with carbon. Where should titanium be placed in the list? **A** below copper **B** between iron and copper **C** between magnesium and zinc **D** between zinc and iron 


© UCLES 2016 0620/13/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**25** Basic oxides and oxygen are used to convert iron into steel. Which statement is **not** correct? **A** Carbon is converted into carbon dioxide. 

# B Silicon is converted into silicon( IV) oxide. 

 C The basic oxides react with acidic impurities to form slag. D The oxygen reacts with the iron to produce hematite. 

**26** A student added dilute hydrochloric acid to four metals and recorded the results. Some of the results are **not** correct. results metal gas given off 1 copper yes 2 iron yes 3 magnesium no 4 zinc yes Which **two** results are correct? **A** 1 and 3 **B** 1 and 4 **C** 2 and 3 **D** 2 and 4 

**27** Some properties of aluminium are listed. 1 It conducts heat. 2 It has a low density. 3 It is mechanically strong. 4 It is resistant to corrosion. Which properties make aluminium suitable for making food containers for chilled food products? **A** 1, 2 and 4 **B** 1, 3 and 4 **C** 1 only **D** 4 only 


© UCLES 2016 0620/13/O/N/16 

**28** The diagram represents the water cycle. At which stage during the cycle are soluble impurities removed from the water? 

 sea 

## A 

## D 

 rain 

 C evaporate 

 condense 

 lake 

 river 

 Sun 

## B 

**29** Air is a mixture of gases. Which gas is present in the largest amount? **A** argon **B** carbon dioxide **C** nitrogen **D** oxygen 

**30** Which information about carbon dioxide and methane is correct? 

 carbon dioxide methane A formed when vegetation decomposes   key B greenhouse gas    = true C present in unpolluted air    = false D produced during respiration   


© UCLES 2016 0620/13/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**31** Calcium oxide and ammonium salts are used by farmers to treat soils. Why are these **two** substances added at different times? **A** They are both acidic. **B** They are both basic. **C** They react with each other to produce ammonia. **D** They react with each other to produce hydrogen. 

**32** The chart shows how a gas, G, is formed in four reactions, from glucose or from a solid, S. 

 gas G 

 solid S 

 glucose heat 

 dilute acid 

 respiration 

 combustion 

 What are the formulae of gas G and solid S? gas G solid S A CH 4 Ca B CH 4 CaCO 3 C CO 2 Ca D CO 2 CaCO 3 

**33** Slaked lime is used to neutralise an acidic soil. How does the pH of the soil change? from to **A** 6 7 **B** 7 8 **C** 8 7 **D** 8 6 


© UCLES 2016 0620/13/O/N/16 

**34** Which list shows the fractions obtained from distilling petroleum, in order of increasing boilingpoint? 

 A bitumen → diesel oil → fuel oil → lubricating oil B diesel oil → gasoline → naphtha → kerosene C gasoline → naphtha → kerosene → diesel oil D kerosene → lubricating oil → naphtha → refinery gas 

**35** Butane reacts as shown. 

butane (^) and heatcatalyst butene + hydrogen What is this type of reaction? **A** combustion **B** cracking **C** polymerisation **D** reduction **36** The structure of a compound, X, is shown. 

## H C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## C C C C H 

## H H 

 To which homologous series does X belong? A alcohols B alkanes C alkenes D carboxylic acids 


© UCLES 2016 0620/13/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**37** An organic compound has the following properties. 

 colour Universaleffect on Indicator 

flammability (^) aqueous bromineeffect on state at roomtemperature colourless none highly flammable decolourises gas To which homologous series does this organic compound belong? **A** alcohols **B** alkanes **C** alkenes **D** carboxylic acids **38** The diagram shows some apparatus. water air lock yeast, sugar and water What is made using this apparatus? **A** ethane **B** ethanoic acid **C** ethanol **D** ethene **39** Which molecule can be polymerised? 

## H C 

## A 

## H 

## H 

## H H C 

## B 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## D 

## H C 

H (^) O O 

## C 

## H 


© UCLES 2016 0620/13/O/N/16 

**40** Ethanol is used as a biofuel. Which equation shows the complete combustion of ethanol? **A** C 2 H 5 OH + 3O 2 → 2CO 2 + 2H 2 O **B** C 2 H 5 OH + 3O 2 → 2CO 2 + 3H 2 O **C** 2C 2 H 5 OH + 6O 2 → 4CO 2 + 4H 2 O **D** 2C 2 H 5 OH + 7O 2 → 4CO 2 + 6H 2 O 


## BLANK PAGE 

© UCLES 2016 0620/13/O/N/16 


## BLANK PAGE 

© UCLES 2016 0620/13/O/N/16 


## BLANK PAGE 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeInternational Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge LocalExaminations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2016 0620/13/O/N/16 


© UCLES 2016 0620/13/O/N/16 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements^1 Hhydrogen^1 

(^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Beberyllium 9 **Key** atomic numberatomic symbol name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mgmagnesium 24 19 Kpotassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Srstrontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Gegermanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 (^22) Tititanium (^4840) Zrzirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rfrutherfordium– 23 Vvanadium (^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Crchromium (^5242) Momolybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sgseaborgium– (^25) Mnmanganese (^5543) Tctechnetium– (^75) Rerhenium (^186107) Bhbohrium– (^26) Feiron (^5644) Ruruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Iriridium (^192109) Mtmeitnerium– (^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pdpalladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Dsdarmstadtium– (^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rgroentgenium– (^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cdcadmium (^11280) Hgmercury (^201112) Cncopernicium– 114 F _l_ flerovium– (^116) Lvlivermorium– (^7) Nnitrogen 1415 Pphosphorus (^3133) Asarsenic (^7551) Sbantimony 12283 Bibismuth 209 (^8) Ooxygen 1616 Ssulfur (^3234) Seselenium (^7952) Tetellurium (^12884) Popolonium– (^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Brbromine 8053 I iodine 12785 Atastatine– (^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Scscandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) Lalanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.) actinium– (^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium^141 (^91) Paprotactinium 231 (^60) Ndneodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pmpromethium– (^93) Npneptunium– (^62) Smsamarium (^15094) Puplutonium– (^63) Eueuropium (^15295) Amamericium– (^64) Gdgadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bkberkelium– (^66) Dydysprosium 16398 Cfcalifornium– (^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Eseinsteinium– (^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Mdmendelevium– (^70) Ybytterbium (^173102) Nonobelium– (^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lrlawrencium– 


