 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. IB16 11_0620_12/7RP© UCLES 2016 [Turn over 

# *5967809337* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/12 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) October/November 2016 Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet^ 45 minutes Soft clean eraserSoft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil.Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unlessthis has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

There areanswers **A** (^) , **forty B** , **C** questions on this paper. Answerand **D**. **all** questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the **one** you consider correct and record your choice in **soft pencil** on the separate Answer Sheet. **Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully.** Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer.Any rough working should be done in this booklet. A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16.Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/12/O/N/16 

**1** ‘Particlesconcentration.’ moving **very slowly** from an area of higher concentration to an area of lower 

 Which process is being described? A a liquid being frozen B a solid melting C a substance diffusing through a liquid D a substance diffusing through the air 

**2** A student mixes 25 cm^3 samples of dilute hydrochloric acid with different volumes of aqueous sodium hydroxide. In each case, the student measures the change in temperature to test if the reaction is exothermic. Which piece of apparatus is **not** needed? 

 burette clock pipette thermometer 

## A B C D 

**3** A sample contains a mixture of powdered limestone (calcium carbonate), sugar and wax. What is the correct way to obtain a pure sample of sugar? **A** Dissolve the mixture in dilute hydrochloric acid, filter and wash the residue. **B** Dissolve the mixture in hexane, filter and evaporate the filtrate. **C** Dissolve the mixture in water, filter and evaporate the filtrate. **D** Dissolve the mixture in water, filter and wash the residue. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/12/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**4** The table shows information about four different particles. 

particle (^) numberproton nucleonnumber of protonsnumber of neutronsnumber of electronsnumber Na 11 23 11 W 11 Na +^11 23 11 12 X O 8 16 8 Y 8 O2–^8 16 8 8 Z What are the values of W, X, Y and Z? W X Y Z **A** 11 10 10 8 **B** 11 11 8 10 **C** 12 10 8 10 **D** 12 11 10 8 **5** Which pair of statements about diamond and graphite is correct? diamond graphite **A** Diamond and graphite are both pure carbon. They are both macromolecules. **B** Diamond and graphite can both be used as electrodes. Graphite is also used as a lubricant. **C** Diamond has covalent bonds. Graphite has ionic bonds. **D** Diamond is hard with a high melting point. Graphite is soft with a low melting point. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/12/O/N/16 

**6** Which row shows the electronic structure of the sodium ion and the chloride ion in sodiumchloride? 

 sodium ion chloride ion A 2,8 2,8,7 B 2,8 2,8,8 C 2,8,1 2,8,7 D 2,8,1 2,8,8 

**7** A molecule of X contains two bromine atoms, three carbon atoms, six hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom. What is the formula of X? **A** CHBrO **B** C 3 H 6 B 2 O **C** C 3 H 6 Br 2 O **D** C3H6Br2O 

**8** Theelectrodes. diagram shows the electrolysis of concentrated aqueous sodium chloride using inert 

 concentrated aqueous sodium chloride 

## + – 

 Which substances are produced at the electrodes? anode cathode A colourless gas colourless gas B colourless gas green gas C green gas colourless gas D green gas green gas 


© UCLES 2016 0620/12/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**9** Which apparatus could be used to electroplate an iron nail with copper? 

## + – 

## A 

## + – 

## B 

## + – 

## C D 

# aqueous copper(II) sulfate 

# aqueous iron(II) sulfate 

## + – 

 key = copper sheet 

 = iron nail 

**10** Which experiment is the most exothermic? 

 initial temperature / °C 

 final temperature / °C A 20 5 B 20 32 C 25 12 D 25 34 

**11** Which substance is **not** used as a fuel? **A** bitumen **B** diesel **C** gasoline **D** hydrogen 


© UCLES 2016 0620/12/O/N/16 

**12** Zinc granules are reacted with excess dilute hydrochloric acid. The volume of hydrogen given off is measured at different times. The results are shown on the graph, labelled experiment 1. The results for a second experiment are also shown on the graph, labelled experiment 2. 

(^00) time volume of hydrogen experiment 1 experiment 2 Which change to the conditions was made in experiment 2? **A** The concentration of the hydrochloric acid was decreased. **B** The size of the zinc granules was decreased. **C** The surface area of the zinc granules was increased. **D** The temperature was increased. 

# 13 When green crystals of nickel(II) sulfate are heated, water is given off and a yellow solid remains. 

 When water is added to the yellow solid, the green colour returns. Which process describes these changes? A combustion B corrosion C neutralisation D reversible reaction 

**14** In which reaction is the copper compound reduced? 

**A** CuCO 3 → CuO + CO (^2) **B** CuO + H 2 SO 4 → CuSO 4 + H 2 O **C** CuSO 4 + 2NaOH → Cu(OH) 2 + Na 2 SO 4 **D** 2CuO + C → 2Cu + CO 2 


© UCLES 2016 0620/12/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**15** The element selenium forms the oxide SeOsodium hydroxide. 2. This oxide dissolves in concentrated aqueous 

 The element zirconium forms the oxide ZrO 2. This oxide dissolves in concentrated sulfuric acid. How are the elements selenium and zirconium classified? selenium zirconium A metal metal B metal non-metal C non-metal metal D non-metal non-metal 

**16** AqueousW, X, Y and Z. sodium hydroxide was added slowly, until in excess, to separate solutions of 

 The results are shown. 

solution (^) aqueous sodium hydroxideinitial observation with final observation with excessaqueous sodium hydroxide W white precipitate formed precipitate dissolves X white precipitate formed no change Y pale blue precipitate formed no change Z green precipitate formed no change Which row identifies the metal ions in the solutions? metal ion in solution W metal ion in solution X metal ion in solution Y metal ion in solution Z 

# A aluminium calcium copper(II) iron(II) 

# B aluminium calcium iron(II) copper(II) 

# C aluminium iron(II) calcium copper(II) 

# D calcium aluminium copper(II) iron(II) 


© UCLES 2016 0620/12/O/N/16 

**17** Acids can react with metal oxides, carbonates and metals. Which reactions produce a gas? acid with metal oxide 

 acid with carbonate 

 acid with metal A    key B    = gas is produced C    = no gas is produced D    

# 18 The apparatus shown is used to prepare aqueous copper(II) sulfate. 

## Y 

 stirrer solid X 

 aqueous 

# copper(II) sulfate 

 excess of solid X 

 filter paper 

 heat What are X and Y? X Y 

# A copper aqueous iron(II) sulfate 

# B copper(II) chloride sulfuric acid 

# C copper(II) oxide sulfuric acid 

# D sulfur aqueous copper(II) chloride 


© UCLES 2016 0620/12/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**19** Part of the Periodic Table is shown. 

## V 

## X 

## W 

## Y Z 

 Which statement about the elements is correct? A V has a higher melting point than X. B X is less reactive than V. C Y has less metallic character than Z. D Z is more reactive than W. 

**20** What is **not** a property of Group I metals? **A** They are soft and can be cut with a knife. **B** They react when exposed to oxygen in the air. **C** They produce an acidic solution when they react with water. **D** They react rapidly with water producing hydrogen gas. 

**21** Which gas is **not** a noble gas? **A** fluorine **B** helium **C** radon **D** xenon 

**22** Which element is a transition element? 

 colour of chloride 

 melting point of element / °C A orange 113 B orange 1535 C white 113 D white 1535 


© UCLES 2016 0620/12/O/N/16 

**23** Which statement about the elements in Group VII is **not** correct? **A** Br 2 is less reactive than I 2. 

**B** C _l_ (^) 2 is used for water treatment. **C** F 2 is a covalent molecule. **D** I 2 forms a purple vapour when warmed. **24** Four metals are listed in decreasing order of reactivity. magnesium zinc iron copper Titanium reacts with acid and cannot be extracted from its ore by heating with carbon. Where should titanium be placed in the list? **A** below copper **B** between iron and copper **C** between magnesium and zinc **D** between zinc and iron **25** Impurities in iron obtained from the blast furnace include carbon, phosphorus and silicon. Which impurities are removed from the molten iron as gases when it is made into steel? **A** carbon and phosphorus **B** carbon and silicon **C** carbon only **D** phosphorus and silicon 


© UCLES 2016 0620/12/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**26** A student added dilute hydrochloric acid to four metals and recorded the results. Some of the results are **not** correct. results metal gas given off 1 copper yes 2 iron yes 3 magnesium no 4 zinc yes Which **two** results are correct? **A** 1 and 3 **B** 1 and 4 **C** 2 and 3 **D** 2 and 4 

**27** What is a common use of mild steel? **A** aircraft manufacture **B** electrical wiring **C** making car bodies **D** making cutlery 

**28** River water contains soluble impurities, insoluble impurities and bacteria. River water is made safe to drink by filtration and chlorination. Which statement is correct? **A** Filtration removes bacteria and insoluble impurities, and chlorination removes soluble impurities. **B** Filtration removes insoluble impurities, and chlorination kills the bacteria. **C** Filtration removes soluble and insoluble impurities, and chlorination kills the bacteria. **D** Filtration removes soluble impurities and bacteria, and chlorination removes insoluble impurities. 

**29** Air is a mixture of gases. Which gas is present in the largest amount? **A** argon **B** carbon dioxide **C** nitrogen **D** oxygen 


© UCLES 2016 0620/12/O/N/16 

**30** Which information about carbon dioxide and methane is correct? 

 carbon dioxide methane A formed when vegetation decomposes   key B greenhouse gas    = true C present in unpolluted air    = false D produced during respiration   

**31** Aqueous sodium hydroxide is added to a sample of a fertiliser and the mixture warmed. Ammonia gas is given off. Which ion does the fertiliser contain? **A** ammonium **B** nitrate **C** phosphate **D** potassium 

**32** Which reaction would **not** result in the production of carbon dioxide? **A** combustion of methane **B** fermentation **C** reaction between an acid and a metal **D** respiration 

**33** Which substance gives off carbon dioxide on heating? **A** lime **B** limestone **C** limewater **D** slaked lime 

**34** Petroleum is separated into fractions. Which statement is **not** correct? **A** Each fraction contains a mixture of hydrocarbon molecules. **B** Fuel oil burns easily and is used as fuel in cars. **C** Refinery gas is the fraction containing the smallest molecules. **D** The fractions are separated depending on their boiling point range. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/12/O/N/16 **[Turn over** 

**35** Butane reacts as shown. 

butane (^) and heatcatalyst butene + hydrogen What is this type of reaction? **A** combustion **B** cracking **C** polymerisation **D** reduction **36** Which compound is **not** a member of the alkene homologous series? **A** CH 3 CHCH (^2) **B** CH 3 CH 2 CHCH (^2) **C** CH 3 CHCHCH (^3) **D** CH 3 CH 2 CH 2 CH 2 CH 3 **37** Which compound decolourises aqueous bromine? **A** 2-methylpropane **B** butane **C** cyclohexane **D** hexene **38** The equation represents the fermentation of X. X yeast^ ethanol + carbon dioxide What is X? **A** ethanoic acid **B** ethene **C** glucose **D** methanol 


© UCLES 2016 0620/12/O/N/16 

**39** Which molecule can be polymerised? 

## H C 

## A 

## H 

## H 

## H H C 

## B 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## D 

## H C 

H (^) O O 

## C 

## H 

**40** Which equation for the complete combustion of ethanol is correct? **A** C 2 H 5 OH + 3O 2 → 2CO 2 + 3H 2 O **B** 2C 2 H 5 OH + 7O 2 → 4CO 2 + 6H 2 O **C** 2C 2 H 5 OH + 5O 2 → 2CO 2 + 6H 2 O **D** 4C 2 H 5 OH + 7O 2 → 4CO 2 + 10H 2 O 


## BLANK PAGE 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeInternational Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge LocalExaminations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2016 0620/12/O/N/16 


© UCLES 2016 0620/12/O/N/16 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements^1 Hhydrogen^1 

(^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Beberyllium 9 **Key** atomic numberatomic symbol name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mgmagnesium 24 19 Kpotassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Srstrontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Gegermanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 (^22) Tititanium (^4840) Zrzirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rfrutherfordium– 23 Vvanadium (^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Crchromium (^5242) Momolybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sgseaborgium– (^25) Mnmanganese (^5543) Tctechnetium– (^75) Rerhenium (^186107) Bhbohrium– (^26) Feiron (^5644) Ruruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Iriridium (^192109) Mtmeitnerium– (^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pdpalladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Dsdarmstadtium– (^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rgroentgenium– (^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cdcadmium (^11280) Hgmercury (^201112) Cncopernicium– 114 F _l_ flerovium– (^116) Lvlivermorium– (^7) Nnitrogen 1415 Pphosphorus (^3133) Asarsenic (^7551) Sbantimony 12283 Bibismuth 209 (^8) Ooxygen 1616 Ssulfur (^3234) Seselenium (^7952) Tetellurium (^12884) Popolonium– (^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Brbromine 8053 I iodine 12785 Atastatine– (^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Scscandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) Lalanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.) actinium– (^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium^141 (^91) Paprotactinium 231 (^60) Ndneodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pmpromethium– (^93) Npneptunium– (^62) Smsamarium (^15094) Puplutonium– (^63) Eueuropium (^15295) Amamericium– (^64) Gdgadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bkberkelium– (^66) Dydysprosium 16398 Cfcalifornium– (^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Eseinsteinium– (^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Mdmendelevium– (^70) Ybytterbium (^173102) Nonobelium– (^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lrlawrencium– 


