 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 16 printed pages. IB16 11_0620_23/6RP© UCLES 2016 [Turn over 

# *0838065749* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/23 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) October/November 2016 Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet^ 45 minutes Soft clean eraserSoft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid.Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you.DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

There areanswers A (^) ,forty B, C questions on this paper. Answerand D. all questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet.A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/23/O/N/16 

1 ‘Particlesconcentration.’ moving very slowly from an area of higher concentration to an area of lower 

 Which process is being described? A a liquid being frozen B a solid melting C a substance diffusing through a liquid D a substance diffusing through the air 

2 A student mixes 25 cm^3 samples of dilute hydrochloric acid with different volumes of aqueous sodium hydroxide. In each case, the student measures the change in temperature to test if the reaction is exothermic. Which piece of apparatus is not needed? 

 burette clock pipette thermometer 

## A B C D 


© UCLES 2016 0620/23/O/N/16 [Turn over 

3 A solid X is purified in five steps. The first four steps of the purification are shown in the diagram. 

 step 1 step 2 step 3 step 4 

 heat 

 solid X 

 mixture Y 

 In step 5, how is a pure sample of solid X obtained from mixture Y? A dissolving B distillation C evaporating D filtering 

4 An atom has three electron shells. There are three electrons in the outer shell. How many protons and how many neutrons are in this atom? protons neutrons A 13 14 B 13 27 C 14 13 D 21 24 

5 Ethanol is a liquid at room temperature and boils at 78 °C. Sodium chloride is a solid at room temperature. Which statement about the bonding in ethanol and sodium chloride is not correct? A Each ethanol molecule is held together by weak covalent bonds. B The ethanol molecules are held together by weak attractive forces. C The sodium ions and chloride ions are held together by strong attractive forces. D The sodium ions and chloride ions are held together in a giant lattice. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/23/O/N/16 

6 The molecules N 2 , C 2 H 4 , CO 2 and CH 3 OH all have covalent bonds. These bonds consist of shared pairs of electrons. Which row gives the total number of shared pairs of electrons in the molecules shown? molecule total number of sharedpairs of electrons A N 2 2 B C 2 H 4 6 C CO 2 2 D CH 3 OH 4 

7 Metals are malleable. Which statement explains why metals are malleable? A Metallic bonding is very strong. B Metals are good conductors of electricity. C Positive metal ions are arranged in a regular lattice structure. D The layers of positive metal ions can slide over each other. 

8 The equation shows the complete combustion of propane. C 3 H 8 (g) + 5O 2 (g) → 3CO 2 (g) + 4H 2 O(l) Which statement is correct? A 10 cm^3 of propane cannot burn if less than 50 cm^3 of oxygen is present. B 10 cm^3 of propane would produce 40 cm^3 of liquid water. C 100 cm^3 of oxygen would be sufficient to react completely with 20 cm^3 of propane. D This reaction would result in an increase in the volume of gas. 

9 Sodium hydroxide reacts with sulfuric acid. The equation for the reaction is shown. 2NaOH + H 2 SO 4 → Na 2 SO 4 + 2H 2 O Which volume of 0.4 mol / dm^3 sodium hydroxide reacts with 50.0 cm^3 of 0.1 mol / dm^3 sulfuric acid? A 12.5 cm^3 B 25.0 cm^3 C 50.0 cm^3 D 100.0 cm^3 


© UCLES 2016 0620/23/O/N/16 [Turn over 

10 Which apparatus could be used to electroplate an iron nail with copper? 

## + – 

## A 

## + – 

## B 

## + – 

## C D 

# aqueous copper(II) sulfate 

# aqueous iron(II) sulfate 

## + – 

 key = copper sheet 

 = iron nail 

11 The diagram shows two different metal strips dipped into an electrolyte. 

 V 

 metal strips 

 electrolyte 

 Which pair of metals produces the highest voltage? A copper and iron B copper and magnesium C copper and zinc D magnesium and iron 


© UCLES 2016 0620/23/O/N/16 

12 10 g of ammonium nitrate are added to water at 25 °C and the mixture stirred. The ammonium nitrate dissolves and, after one minute, the temperature of the solution is 10 °C. Which word describes this change? A endothermic B exothermic C neutralisation D reduction 

13 The energy level diagram for a reaction is shown. 

 energy 

 reactants 

 products 

 E a H 

 Which row is correct? sign of ∆H overall energy change sign of Ea A – exothermic – B + endothermic + C + endothermic – D + exothermic + 


© UCLES 2016 0620/23/O/N/16 [Turn over 

14 An experiment X is carried out between a solid and a solution using the apparatus shown. 

 gas syringe 

 The volume of gas given off is measured at different times and the results plotted on a graph. In a second experiment Y, the surface area of the solid is increased but all other factors remain the same. Which graph shows the results of experiments X and Y? A 

 volume of gas 

(^00) time 

## Y 

## X 

## B 

 volume of gas 

(^00) time 

## Y 

## X 

## C 

 volume of gas 

(^00) time 

## Y 

## X 

## D 

 volume of gas 

(^00) time 

## Y 

## X 

15 Which change in conditions increases the energy of the particles in a reaction? A addition of a catalyst B increase in concentration C increase in surface area D increase in temperature 


© UCLES 2016 0620/23/O/N/16 

16 Chlorine can be manufactured by the following reaction. The reaction is exothermic. 4HCl (g) + O 2 (g) 2H 2 O(g) + 2Cl 2 (g) Which change increases the yield of chlorine at equilibrium? A adding more HCl (g) B adding more H 2 O(g) C decreasing the pressure D increasing the temperature 

17 Which change represents an oxidation reaction? 

# A chlorine changes to chlorate(I) ions 

 B chlorine changes to chloride ions 

# C copper(II) ions change to copper 

# D potassium manganate(VII) ions change to potassium manganate(VI) ions 

18 Germanium oxide is a white powder. Germanium oxide reacts with concentrated hydrochloric acid. Germanium oxide reacts with concentrated aqueous sodium hydroxide. Germanium oxide does not dissolve when added to water. Which type of oxide is germanium oxide? A acidic B amphoteric C basic D neutral 

19 Hydrogen chloride gas reacts with water to produce an acidic solution. The equation for the reaction is shown. HCl + H 2 O → Cl –^ + H 3 O+ Which statement describes what happens during the reaction? A The chloride ion is formed by accepting an electron from the water. B The hydrogen chloride loses an electron to form the chloride ion. C The water accepts a proton from the hydrogen chloride. D The water donates a proton to the hydrogen chloride. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/23/O/N/16 [Turn over 

# 20 The apparatus shown is used to prepare aqueous copper(II) sulfate. 

## Y 

 stirrer solid X 

 aqueous 

# copper(II) sulfate 

 excess of solid X 

 filter paper 

 heat What are X and Y? X Y 

# A copper aqueous iron(II) sulfate 

# B copper(II) chloride sulfuric acid 

# C copper(II) oxide sulfuric acid 

# D sulfur aqueous copper(II) chloride 

21 Information about some silver compounds is shown in the table. 

 compound formula solubility in water silver carbonate Ag 2 CO 3 insoluble silver chloride AgCl insoluble silver nitrate AgNO 3 soluble silver oxide Ag 2 O insoluble Which equation shows a reaction which cannot be used to make a silver salt? A AgNO 3 (aq) + HCl (aq) → AgCl (s) + HNO 3 (aq) B Ag 2 O(s) + 2HNO 3 (aq) → 2AgNO 3 (aq) + H 2 O(l) C Ag 2 CO 3 (s) + 2HNO 3 (aq) → 2AgNO 3 (aq) + H 2 O(l) + CO 2 (g) D 2Ag(s) + 2HCl (aq) → 2AgCl (s) + H 2 (g) 


© UCLES 2016 0620/23/O/N/16 

22 What is not a property of Group I metals? A They are soft and can be cut with a knife. B They react when exposed to oxygen in the air. C They produce an acidic solution when they react with water. D They react rapidly with water producing hydrogen gas. 

23 Compound T is added to dilute hydrochloric acid and warmed gently. 

# The mixture gives off a gas which turns acidified aqueous potassium manganate(to colourless. VII) from purple 

 A flame test on compound T gives a lilac flame. What is compound T? A sodium sulfate B sodium sulfite C potassium sulfate D potassium sulfite 

24 Part of the Periodic Table is shown. 

## W 

## Z 

## X Y 

 Which row correctly describes the properties of elements W, X, Y and Z? 

 oxidation stateshas variable reacts withcold water unreactivevery outer shellhas four electrons A W Y Z X B X W Y Z C Z W Y X D Z Y X W 


© UCLES 2016 0620/23/O/N/16 [Turn over 

25 Basic oxides and oxygen are used to convert iron into steel. Which statement is not correct? A Carbon is converted into carbon dioxide. 

# B Silicon is converted into silicon(IV) oxide. 

 C The basic oxides react with acidic impurities to form slag. D The oxygen reacts with the iron to produce hematite. 

26 The results of two experiments are given. 1 Cobalt displaces manganese from an aqueous solution of a manganese salt. 2 Manganese displaces silver from an aqueous solution of a silver salt. Three more experiments are carried out. 3 Cobalt is added to an aqueous solution of a silver salt. 4 Manganese is added to an aqueous solution of a cobalt salt. 5 Silver is added to an aqueous solution of a cobalt salt. In which experiments does a reaction take place? A 3 only B 3 and 4 C 4 and 5 D 5 only 

27 Cryolite, Na 3 Al F 6 , is added to aluminium oxide in the electrolytic extraction of aluminium. What is the reason for this? A to decrease the melting point of the electrolyte B to protect the anodes C to produce more aluminium D to stop the aluminium reacting with air 

28 Different forms of steel contain different proportions of carbon. Steel P contains a high proportion of carbon. Steel Q contains a low proportion of carbon. Which statement is correct? A P is stronger and more brittle than Q. B P is stronger and less brittle than Q. C P is less strong and more brittle than Q. D P is less strong and less brittle than Q. 


© UCLES 2016 0620/23/O/N/16 

29 Air is a mixture of gases. Which gas is present in the largest amount? A argon B carbon dioxide C nitrogen D oxygen 

30 Which information about carbon dioxide and methane is correct? 

 carbon dioxide methane A formed when vegetation decomposes   key B greenhouse gas    = true C present in unpolluted air    = false D produced during respiration   

31 A metal, X, is used to make oil pipelines. X corrodes in air and water. X can be protected from corrosion by attaching blocks of element Y. Which statement is correct? A This process is known as galvanising. B Y forms positive ions more readily than X. C Y is an unreactive metal. D Y is an unreactive non-metal. 

32 The Haber process for the manufacture of ammonia occurs at 450nitrogen and hydrogen are supplied in a 1:3 ratio by volume. The reaction is exothermic. °C and 250 atmospheres. The 

 N 2 (g) + 3H 2 (g) 2NH 3 (g) ∆H = –92 kJ / mol Which change causes an increase in the yield of ammonia? A decreasing the concentration of nitrogen B decreasing the pressure C decreasing the temperature D using equal amounts of the two reactants 


© UCLES 2016 0620/23/O/N/16 [Turn over 

33 The following scheme shows four stages in the conversion of sulfur to sulfuric acid. In which stage is a catalyst used? 

 oleum 

 air air 

 water 

sulfur (^) dioxidesulfur trioxidesulfur concentrated sulfuric acid concentrated sulfuric acid stage **B** stage **D** stage **C** stage **A** 34 Slaked lime is used to neutralise an acidic soil. How does the pH of the soil change? from to A 6 7 B 7 8 C 8 7 D 8 6 35 Which list shows the fractions obtained from distilling petroleum, in order of increasing boiling point? A bitumen → diesel oil → fuel oil → lubricating oil B diesel oil → gasoline → naphtha → kerosene C gasoline → naphtha → kerosene → diesel oil D kerosene → lubricating oil → naphtha → refinery gas 


© UCLES 2016 0620/23/O/N/16 

36 Butane reacts as shown. 

butane (^) and heatcatalyst butene + hydrogen What is this type of reaction? A combustion B cracking C polymerisation D reduction 37 Substance Z has the following characteristics. 1 It burns in an excess of oxygen to form carbon dioxide and water. 2 It is oxidised by air to form a liquid smelling of vinegar. 3 It reacts with carboxylic acids to form esters. What is substance Z? A ethane B ethanoic acid C ethanol D ethyl ethanoate 38 Ethanol is manufactured by the catalytic addition of steam to ethene and by fermentation. Which row shows an advantage and a disadvantage of using the catalytic addition of steam to ethene compared to fermentation? advantage disadvantage A fast the product is impure B fast uses non-renewable materials C the product is pure slow D uses renewable materials slow 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeInternational Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge LocalExaminations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2016 0620/23/O/N/16 

39 The organic compound shown can be polymerised. 

## C 

CH (^3) C _l_ C H 

## F 

 Which diagram represents a section of the polymer? 

## F F 

CH (^3) C C C C CH 3 H C _l_ C _l_ H 

## A 

 C l F 

 C l C C C C 

H F CH (^3) 

## CH 3 H 

## B 

## H H 

## F 

## C C C C 

 C l F C l 

CH 3 CH (^3) 

## C 

F CH (^3) 

## H 

## C C C C 

 C l H C l 

## CH 3 F 

## D 

40 The partial structure of a polymer is shown. 

## C 

## O 

## C C 

## O O 

## N 

## H 

## N 

## H 

## N 

## H 

 Which type of polymer is represented? A a carbohydrate B a polyamide C a polyester D an addition polymer 


© UCLES 2016 0620/23/O/N/16 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements^1 Hhydrogen^1 

(^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Beberyllium 9 atomic number atomic symbol **Key**^ name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mgmagnesium 24 19 Kpotassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Srstrontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Gegermanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 22 Tititanium (^4840) Zrzirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rfrutherfordium– 23 Vvanadium (^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Crchromium (^5242) Momolybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sgseaborgium– (^25) Mnmanganese (^5543) Tctechnetium– (^75) Rerhenium (^186107) Bhbohrium– (^26) Feiron (^5644) Ruruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Iriridium (^192109) Mtmeitnerium– (^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pdpalladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Dsdarmstadtium– (^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rgroentgenium– (^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cdcadmium (^11280) Hgmercury (^201112) Cncopernicium– 114 F _l_ flerovium– 116 Lvlivermorium– (^7) Nnitrogen 1415 Pphosphorus (^3133) Asarsenic (^7551) Sbantimony 12283 Bibismuth 209 (^8) Ooxygen 1616 Ssulfur (^3234) Seselenium (^7952) Tetellurium (^12884) Popolonium– (^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Brbromine 8053 I iodine 12785 Atastatine– (^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Scscandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) Lalanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.) actinium– (^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium^141 (^91) Paprotactinium 231 (^60) Ndneodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pmpromethium– (^93) Npneptunium– (^62) Smsamarium (^15094) Puplutonium– (^63) Eueuropium (^15295) Amamericium– (^64) Gdgadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bkberkelium– (^66) Dydysprosium 16398 Cfcalifornium– (^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Eseinsteinium– (^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Mdmendelevium– (^70) Ybytterbium (^173102) Nonobelium– (^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lrlawrencium– 


