 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 The teacher responsible for preparing the examination is not allowed to consult the question paper before the examination. Teachers should, as part of the preparation of the examination requirements, carry out any tests indicated on pages 2 and 3 in order to satisfy themselves that the supplied materials are satisfactory. 

 The standard Report Form to be included with the scripts is given on pages 7 and 8. Please detach and enclose it with the scripts. If scripts are despatched in more than one envelope, it is essential that a copy of the Supervisor’s Results and of the Report Form are sent inside each envelope. 

 More material may be issued if required, without penalty, but this should not be necessary. Safety spectacles may be provided if considered necessary. 

 Supervisors are advised to remind candidates that all substances in the examination should be treated with caution. Please also see under ‘General Apparatus’ on the use of pipette fi llers and safety goggles. 

 In accordance with COSHH (Control of Substances Hazardous to Health) Regulations, operative in the UK, a hazard appraisal of the examination has been carried out. 

 Attention is drawn, in particular, to certain materials used in the examination. The following codes are used where relevant. 

 C = corrosive substance F = highly flammable substance 

 H = harmful or irritating substance O = oxidising substance 

 N = harmful to the environment T = toxic substance 

 Hazard data sheets should be available from your suppliers. 

 If you have any queries regarding these Instructions, please contact Cambridge by e-mail: info@cie.org.uk, by phone: +44 1223 553554, by fax: +44 1223 553558, stating the Centre number, the nature of the query and the syllabus number quoted above. 

 CHEMISTRY 0620/52 Paper 5 Practical Test February/March 2015 

 CONFIDENTIAL INSTRUCTIONS Great care should be taken to ensure that any confidential information given does not reach the candidates either directly or indirectly. 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certifi cate of Secondary Education 

 This document consists of 8 printed pages. 

 [Turn over 

 IB15 03_0620_52CI/3RP © UCLES 2015 

# *5023187516* 

 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 


© UCLES 2015 0620/52/CI/F/M/15 

**For Question 1** 

_Each candidate will require_ 

 (a) Bunsen burner and matches 

 (b) one 250 cm 3 beaker 

# [O] [H] (c) 4 g of potassium chlorate(V) crystals, KC l O 3 , in a stoppered boiling tube, labelled salt D 

 (d) one stirring thermometer, covering the range 0 °C to 110 °C 

 (e) access to water and distilled water 

 (f) one 50 cm 3 burette with stand and clamp 

 (g) test-tube holder 

 (h) access to a container (e.g. bucket or glass/plastic tub/trough) which is approximately half-filled with water and labelled waste for Question 1 

 (A 1 dm 3 container would be suitable for 1-4 candidates. Larger containers could be shared by greater numbers of candidates.) 


© UCLES 2015 0620/52/CI/F/M/15 **[Turn over** 

**For Question 2** 

_Each candidate will require_ 

# (a) a stoppered test-tube containing about 10 cm 3 of aqueous diammonium iron(II) 

 sulfate-6-water (ferrous ammonium sulfate), (NH 4 ) 2 Fe(SO 4 )2 .6H 2 O, of concentration 0.1 mol / dm^3 , freshly made, labelled solution E 

 This solution can be prepared by dissolving 19.6 g of the salt in 50 cm 3 of 1 mol / dm^3 sulfuric acid and diluting to 500 cm 3 with distilled water in a graduated flask. 

# [H] (b) a stoppered boiling tube containing about 12 cm 3 of a solution of ammonium trioxovanadate(V) 

 (metavanadate), NH 4 VO 3 , labelled solution F 

# Wear goggles when preparing this solution. Dissolve 1.2 g of ammonium trioxovanadate(V) 

 (metavanadate) in 20 cm 3 of 2 mol / dm^3 sodium hydroxide in a beaker. Transfer the solution to a 100 cm 3 measuring cylinder. Add 1 mol / dm 3 sulfuric acid to bring the total volume up to 100 cm 3. Do not heat to dissolve. This should produce a clear yellow solution. 

 (c) rack of six test-tubes and a bung 

 (d) Universal Indicator (pH indicator) papers and chart 

**[C] (e)** aqueous sodium hydroxide of concentration 1.0 mol / dm 3 

 (f) aqueous barium nitrate of suitable concentration to give a positive sulfate test 

**[C] (g)** aqueous nitric acid of concentration 1.0 mol / dm 3 

 (h) filtration apparatus, funnel and filter paper 

# (i) aqueous potassium manganate(VII) of concentration 0.05 mol / dm 3 

 (j) zinc granules 

 (k) spatula 

 (l) 10 cm 3 measuring cylinder 

 (m) Bunsen burner and matches 

 (n) splints 

 (o) teat pipettes 

 (p) access to water and distilled water 

 (q) test-tube holder 

 (r) access to clock or stopwatch 

 Labels do not need to include concentrations. 


© UCLES 2015 0620/52/CI/F/M/15 

## THE SUPERVISOR’S REPORT IS ON PAGES 7 AND 8 


© UCLES 2015 0620/52/CI/F/M/15 **[Turn over** 

## THE SUPERVISOR’S REPORT IS ON PAGES 7 AND 8 


© UCLES 2015 0620/52/CI/F/M/15 

## THE SUPERVISOR’S REPORT IS ON PAGES 7 AND 8 


© UCLES 2015 0620/52/CI/F/M/15 

 This form must be completed and returned in the envelope with the scripts. 

## REPORT ON PRACTICAL CHEMISTRY 

## MARCH 2015 

**1 (a)** Supervisor’s Results 

 It is recommended that the Supervisor should be a chemistry teacher. 

 The Supervisor is asked to carry out the experiments in Questions 1 and 2 and to record the results on a spare copy of the question paper clearly labelled ‘Supervisor’s Results’. Failure to enclose these results and this report form may lead to candidates being unavoidably penalised. 

 (b) The candidate numbers of candidates in each session were: 

 First session Second session 

 [Turn over 


© UCLES 2015 0620/52/CI/F/M/15 

**2** The Supervisor is invited to report details of any difficulties experienced by candidates giving names and candidate numbers. The report should include reference to: 

 (a) any general difficulties encountered in making preparations for the examination; 

 (b) difficulties due to faulty apparatus or materials; 

 (c) accidents to apparatus or materials. 

 Other cases of individual hardship, e.g. illness, temporary disability, should be reported direct to UCLES on the normal Application for Special Consideration form. 

## NAME OF CENTRE ............................................................................................................................... 

## CENTRE NUMBER ................................................... 

## SIGNED ....................................................... 

 Supervisor 

DECLARATION (to be signed by the Principal) 

The preparation of this practical examination has been carried out so as to maintain fully the security of the examination. 

NAME ..................................................................................................................................................... (in block capitals) 

SIGNED .............................................................................................................................. (Principal) 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 


