 This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. 

 DC (KN/SW) 145515/2 © UCLES 2018 [Turn over 

* 4 4 0 1 8 5 0 8 5 1 * 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/22 Paper 2 May/June 2018 2 hours Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all the questions. Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 


© UCLES 2018 0606/22/M/J/18 

 Mathematical Formulae 

### 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

 x 

 b b ac a 

 = 

 − 2 − 4 2 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( _n_ 

# 1 ) a 

_n_ –1 (^) _b_ + 

# ( 

 n 

# 2 ) a 

_n_ –2 (^) _b_ (^2) + … + 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) a 

_n_ – _r_ (^) _br_ (^) + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( _n_ 

# r ) =^ 

 n! ( n – r )! r! 

### 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ 

 sin^2 A + cos^2 A = 1 

 sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A 

 cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC_ 

 a sin A =^ 

 b sin B =^ 

 c sin C 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

 ∆ = 

### 1 

 2 bc^ sin^ A 


© UCLES 2018 0606/22/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**1 (i)** Show that cos _i_ cot _i_ + sin _i_ = cosec _i_. [3] 

 (ii) Hence solve cos i cot i + sin i = 4 for 0 ° G i G 90 °. [2] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/22/M/J/18 

**2 (a)** On the Venn diagram below, shade the region that represents _A_ + _B_ l. 

###  

 A B 

 [1] 

 (b) The universal set  and sets P , Q and R are such that 

 ( P , Q , R )l =Q, P l + ( Q + R )=Q, n ( Q + R ) = 8 , n ( P + R )= 8 , n ( P + Q ) = 10 , 

 n( P ) = 21, n( Q ) = 15, n() = 30. 

 Complete the Venn diagram to show this information and state the value of n( R ). 

###  

 P Q 

 R 

 n( R ) = ................................ [4] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/22/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**3** It is given that _x_ + 3 is a factor of the polynomial p ( ) _x_ = 2 _x_^3 + _ax_^2 24 _x_ + _b_. The remainder when p ( _x_ ) is divided by _x_ − 2 is −15. Find the remainder when p ( _x_ ) is divided by _x_ + 1. [6] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/22/M/J/18 

**4** Find the coordinates of the points where the line 2 _y_ 3 _x_ = 6 intersects the curve _x_^ 

 y 4 9 

### 5 

 2 2 + =. [5] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/22/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**5 (a)** Four parts in a play are to be given to four of the girls chosen from the seven girls in a drama class. Find the number of different ways in which this can be done. [2] 

 (b) Three singers are chosen at random from a group of 5 Chinese, 4 Indian and 2 British singers. Find the number of different ways in which this can be done if 

 (i) no Chinese singer is chosen, [1] 

 (ii) one singer of each nationality is chosen, [2] 

 (iii) the three singers chosen are all of the same nationality. [2] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/22/M/J/18 

### 6 

 1.5 rad O C 

 D 

 E 

 B 

 A 

 5 cm 

 In the diagram, ABC is an arc of the circle centre O , radius 5 cm, and angle AOC is 1.5 radians. AD and CE are diameters of the circle and DE is a straight line. 

 (i) Find the total perimeter of the shaded regions. [3] 

 (ii) Find the total area of the shaded regions. [3] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/22/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**7** Vectors **i** and **j** are vectors parallel to the _x_ -axis and _y_ -axis respectively. 

 Given that a = 2 i + 3 j , b = i − 5 j and c = 3 i + 11 j , find 

 (i) the exact value of a + c , [2] 

 (ii) the value of the constant m such that a + m b is parallel to j , [2] 

 (iii) the value of the constant n such that n a − b = c. [2] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/22/M/J/18 

**8 (a) A** = 

### 2 

### 1 

### 1 

### 3 

### 

### 

### J 

### L 

### KK 

### N 

### P 

 OO and B = 0 3 

### 2 

### 5 

### 

### 

### J 

### L 

### KK 

### N 

### P 

 OO. Find ( BA )−^1. [4] 

 (b) The matrix X is such that XC = D , where C = 

### 2 

### 0 

### 5 

### 10 

### 3 

### 4 

### J 

### L 

### KK 

### N 

### P 

 OO and D = ^4 5 4 h. 

 (i) State the order of the matrix C. [1] 

 (ii) Find the matrix X. [2] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/22/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

**9 (i)** Differentiate _x_^4 ^ sin _x_ h with respect to _x_. [4] 

 (ii) Hence find sin 

 x cos^ sin x 

 c + x^^4 x^ + 8 x^3 ^ x hmd x 

## y.^ [3] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/22/M/J/18 

**10 (a) (i)** On the axes below, sketch the graph of _y_ = ( _x_ + 3 ) ( _x_ 5 ) showing the coordinates of the points where the curve meets the _x_ -axis. [2] 

 O 

 y 

 x 

 (ii) Write down a suitable domain for the function f ( ) x = ( x + 3 ) ( x 5 ) such that f has an inverse. [1] 

 (b) The functions g and h are defined by 

 g ( ) x = 3 x 1 for x > 1, 

h ( ) _x_ = (^4) _x_ for _x_ ≠ 0. **(i)** Find hg ( _x_ ). [1] **(ii)** Find (hg)–1( _x_ ). [2] **(c)** Given that p( _a_ ) = _b_ and that the function p has an inverse, write down p–1^ ( _b_ ). [1] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/22/M/J/18 **[Turn over** 

## 11 (a) Find y 32 x 1 d x. [2] 

## (b) (i) Find y sin 4 d x x. [2] 

**(ii)** Hence evaluate (^) rsin 4 d _x x_ r 8 

## y 4. [2] 

 (c) Show that e d x 3 

 ln x 3 0 

 8 

## y =.^ [5] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/22/M/J/18 

**12** In this question all lengths are in centimetres. 

 The volume of a cone of height h and base radius r is given by V = 31 r r^2 h. 

 It is known that sin 12 r = 6 4 2 , cos 12 r = 6 + 4 2 , tan 12 r = 2 3. 

 h 

 r 

 6 rad 

 r 

 A water cup is in the shape of a cone with its axis vertical. The diagrams show the cup and its cross-section. The vertical angle of the cone is r 6 

 radians. The depth of water in the cup is h. The surface of the water is a circle of radius r. 

 (i) Find an expression for r in terms of h and show that the volume of water in the cup is given by r ( ) V 

 h 3 

### 7 4 3 3 

### = 

### 

### . [4] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/22/M/J/18 

 (ii) Water is poured into the cup at a rate of 30 cm^3 s–1. Find, correct to 2 decimal places, the rate at which the depth of water is increasing when h = 5. [4] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/22/M/J/18 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

### BLANK PAGE 


