 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 19 printed pages and 1 blank page. 

 IB17 03_0625_12/3RP © UCLES 2017 [Turn over 

# *9265727117* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## PHYSICS 0625/12 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) February/March 2017 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A, B, C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. Take the weight of 1.0 kg to be 10 N (acceleration of free fall = 10 m / s^2 ). 


© UCLES 2017 0625/12/F/M/17 

1 The diagram shows the height of a stack of identical coins. 

 2.40 cm 

 stack of coins 

 What is the thickness of one coin? 

 A 0.20 mm B 2.0 mm C 0.24 cm D 2.0 cm 

2 In a laboratory, a ball is dropped in a vacuum and falls 200 cm. 

 0 cm 

 50 cm 

 100 cm 

 150 cm 

 200 cm 

 ball 

 rule 

 Which statement describes the acceleration of the ball? 

 A It is greater at 10 cm than at 200 cm. 

 B It is greatest at 200 cm. 

 C It is smaller at 50 cm than at 100 cm. 

 D It is the same value at 50 cm as at 150 cm. 


© UCLES 2017 0625/12/F/M/17 [Turn over 

3 A man stands by a railway track. 

 A train travelling at 40 m / s takes 2.0 s to pass the man. 

 What is the length of the train? 

 A 20 m B 38 m C 40 m D 80 m 

4 Which statement about the masses and weights of objects on the Earth is correct? 

 A A balance can only be used to compare weights, not masses. 

 B Heavy objects always have more mass than light ones. 

 C Large objects always have more mass than small ones. 

 D Mass is a force but weight is not. 

5 A stone has a weight of 5.7 N. 

 The gravitational field strength g is 10 N / kg. 

 What is the mass of the stone? 

 A 0.57 kg B 5.7 kg C 57 kg D 570 kg 

6 The block of metal shown has a mass of 240 g. 

 5.0 cm 

 3.0 cm 

 4.0 cm 

 What is the density of the metal? 

 A 0.25 g / cm^3 B 4.0 g / cm^3 C 16 g / cm^3 D 14 400 g / cm^3 


© UCLES 2017 0625/12/F/M/17 

7 A car engine causes a forward force of 100 kN to act on the car. The total resistive force on the car is 20 kN. 

 What is the resultant force on the car? 

 A 5.0 kN B 60 kN C 80 kN D 120 kN 

8 A student sets up the apparatus shown in the diagram to find the centre of mass of the card. 

 cork 

 stand 

 pin or nail 

 card 

 string 

 bob 

 small hole 

 The student makes sure that the card, the string and the bob are all at rest. 

 What should the student do next? 

 A Mark a horizontal line on the card level with the middle of the string. 

 B Mark the line of the string on the card. 

 C Pull the bob on the string to one side and release it. 

 D Replace the bob with a heavier bob. 


© UCLES 2017 0625/12/F/M/17 [Turn over 

9 A man can either take an escalator or a lift to travel up between two floors in a hotel. 

 escalator lift 

 The escalator takes 20 seconds to carry the man between the two floors. The useful work done against gravity is W. The useful power developed is P. 

 The lift takes 30 seconds to carry the same man between the same two floors. 

 How much useful work against gravity is done by the lift, and how much useful power is developed by the lift? 

 useful work done against gravity by lift 

 useful power developed by lift 

 A more than W less than P 

 B more than W P 

 C W less than P 

 D W P 

10 The engine of a motor vehicle develops a large amount of power. 

 Which statement is correct? 

 A The driving force acting on the vehicle must be large. 

 B The engine must have a very large volume. 

 C The engine must transfer large amounts of energy each second. 

 D The vehicle must be very fast. 


© UCLES 2017 0625/12/F/M/17 

11 The diagrams show two mercury barometers. The right-hand diagram shows a tube of larger diameter. There is a vacuum above the mercury in both tubes. 

 Which labelled position on the right-hand tube shows the mercury level in the right-hand tube? 

 mercury 

 glass tubes 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 

12 The diagram shows four solid objects resting on a horizontal surface. The objects all have the same weight, and are drawn to the same scale. 

 Which object exerts the least pressure on the surface? 

## A 

 sphere 

## B 

 cylinder 

## C 

 cube 

## D 

 cone 

13 On a hot day, the pressure of the air in a car tyre is greater than on a cold day. 

 Why is the pressure greater on a hot day? 

 A The air molecules strike each other more frequently. 

 B The air molecules strike each other with greater force. 

 C The air molecules strike the tyre walls more frequently. 

 D The number of air molecules in the tyre increases. 


© UCLES 2017 0625/12/F/M/17 [Turn over 

14 Very small pollen grains are suspended in water. A bright light shines from the side. 

 When looked at through a microscope, small specks of light are seen to be moving in a random, jerky manner. 

 bright light 

 pollen grains in water 

 microscope 

 eye 

 What are the moving specks of light? 

 A pollen grains being hit by other pollen grains 

 B pollen grains being hit by water molecules 

 C water molecules being hit by other water molecules 

 D water molecules being hit by pollen grains 

15 When a thermometer is calibrated, the fixed points are marked. 

 What are fixed points? 

 A all the marks on the temperature scale which cannot be removed 

 B all the marks of the temperature scale 

 C the lowest and highest temperatures shown on the thermometer 

 D two temperatures of known value which are easily reproduced 


© UCLES 2017 0625/12/F/M/17 

16 Which statement defines the thermal capacity (heat capacity) of a solid body? 

 A the energy needed to melt the body without a change in temperature 

 B the energy needed to raise the temperature of the body by one degree Celsius 

 C the increase in the volume of the body when its temperature is raised by one degree Celsius 

 D the total amount of internal energy in the body 

17 A substance can exist in three different states: solid, liquid or gas. 

 Each of the two statements below describes a change of state. 

 change 1 Molecules move closer together but continue to travel throughout the substance. 

 change 2 Molecules stop travelling throughout the substance and just vibrate about fixed positions. 

 Which changes of state do these statements describe? 

 change 1 change 2 

 A condensation melting 

 B condensation solidification 

 C solidification condensation 

 D solidification melting 

18 The diagram shows the gap between a hot surface and a cold surface. The gap can contain air, solid iron, a vacuum or liquid water. 

 gap 

 cold 

 hot 

 Which row shows whether heat can be transferred between the surfaces by conduction and convection? 

 conduction convection 

 A air (gas) yes no 

 B iron (solid) yes no 

 C vacuum no yes 

 D water (liquid) yes no 


© UCLES 2017 0625/12/F/M/17 [Turn over 

19 Ice is trapped by a piece of wire gauze at the bottom of a tube containing water. The water at the top of the tube boils before the ice at the bottom of the tube melts. 

 gentle heating 

 water 

 wire gauze 

 ice 

 Why does this happen? 

 A Convection currents are circulating throughout the water. 

 B Ice is a poor emitter of thermal energy. 

 C Water is a poor conductor of thermal energy. 

 D Wire gauze is a good conductor of thermal energy. 


© UCLES 2017 0625/12/F/M/17 

20 In a shallow tank, a water wave moves towards a barrier with a narrow gap. 

 barrier 

 water wave 

 Which diagram shows the wave beyond the barrier? 

## A B 

## C D 


© UCLES 2017 0625/12/F/M/17 [Turn over 

21 A ray of light is incident on the surface of a glass block. 

 air glass 

 normal 

 direction of ray of light 

 Which row describes how the speed and the direction of the ray of light change when it enters the glass? 

 speed in glass direction in glass 

 A decreases closer to the normal 

 B decreases further from the normal 

 C increases closer to the normal 

 D increases further from the normal 

22 A boy sees a fish in a lake. 

 Which labelled path is taken by the light travelling from the fish to the boy’s eye? 

 air water 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 


© UCLES 2017 0625/12/F/M/17 

23 The points labelled F are the principal foci of a lens. A beam of parallel light is incident on the lens. 

 Which diagram shows the path of the light after it passes through the lens? 

## A 

## F F 

## B 

## F F 

## C 

## F F 

## D 

## F F 

24 What is the main type of radiation given out by a campfire? 

 A infra-red 

 B microwave 

 C ultraviolet 

 D X-ray 


© UCLES 2017 0625/12/F/M/17 [Turn over 

25 A student stands a few hundred metres away from a wall and shouts. He hears a faint echo. 

 Which statement is correct? 

 A The sound waves returning are quiet because they have a reduced frequency. 

 B The sound waves returning are quiet because they have a reduced wavelength. 

 C The sound waves returning to the student are longitudinal. 

 D The sound waves returning to the student are transverse. 

26 Which statement about ultrasound is correct? 

 A It is produced by a rapidly vibrating source. 

 B It is uncomfortable to human ears. 

 C Its frequency must be greater than 300 kHz. 

 D It travels the fastest in a vacuum. 

27 A small compass is placed close to a strong bar magnet, the same distance from each end. 

 Which diagram shows the direction in which the compass needle points? 

## N 

## A 

## S 

## N 

## B 

## S 

## N 

## C 

## S 

## N 

## D 

## S 

 compass compass compass compass 

28 A student wishes to magnetise two steel bars X and Y. 

 She places bar X in a coil connected to a d.c. power supply. 

 She places bar Y parallel to a magnetic field and hammers it. 

 Which bars become magnetised? 

 A X and Y 

 B X only 

 C Y only 

 D neither X nor Y 


© UCLES 2017 0625/12/F/M/17 

29 Which particles move in a metal to cause an electric current? 

 A electrons 

 B neutrons 

 C nucleons 

 D protons 

30 The diagrams represent four copper wires. 

 Which wire has the greatest resistance? 

 10 mm 

 1 mm 2 mm 1 mm 2 mm 

 10 mm 

 20 mm 20 mm 

## A B C D 

31 An air-conditioning unit, a lamp and an electric fire all receive electrical energy from the mains supply. 

 From which of these devices is all this energy eventually transferred to the surroundings? 

 airconditioning unit 

 lamp 

 electric fire 

 A    key 

 B    = all energy transferred to surroundings 

 C    = not all energy transferred to surroundings 

 D    


© UCLES 2017 0625/12/F/M/17 [Turn over 

32 In the circuits shown, each of the resistors has a resistance of 1.0 Ω. 

 Which circuit has the greatest resistance? 

## A B 

## C D 


© UCLES 2017 0625/12/F/M/17 

33 The diagram shows an electric circuit. 

## V 

 The light falling on the light-dependent resistor (LDR) increases in brightness. 

 What happens to the resistance of the LDR, the current in the fixed resistor and the reading on the voltmeter? 

 resistance of LDR 

 current in fixed resistor 

 reading on voltmeter 

 A decreases increases decreases 

 B decreases increases increases 

 C increases decreases decreases 

 D increases decreases increases 


© UCLES 2017 0625/12/F/M/17 [Turn over 

34 The diagram shows two linked circuits to control when a bell is switched on. 

 The conditions are altered and only one pair of conditions causes the bell to ring. 

 Which pair causes the bell to ring? 

 A bright light and high temperature 

 B bright light and low temperature 

 C dim light and high temperature 

 D dim light and low temperature 

35 In this circuit, a component at X automatically protects the wiring from overheating if there is a fault. 

 electrical supply 

## X 

 Which row indicates components that are suitable? 

 circuit breaker 

 fuse switch 

 A    key 

 B    = suitable 

 C    = not suitable 

 D    


© UCLES 2017 0625/12/F/M/17 

36 The diagram shows a simple transformer with an input of 240 V and an output of 40 V. 

 There are 600 turns on the primary coil. 

 input output 

## 600 

 turns 

## 240 V 40 V 

 primary coil secondary coil 

 How many turns are there on the secondary coil? 

 A 100 B 320 C 400 D 3600 

37 A wire is placed between the poles of a horseshoe magnet. There is a current in the wire in the direction shown, and this causes a force to act on the wire. 

## N 

 wire S 

 current 

 magnet 

 force 

 Three other arrangements P, Q and R of the wire and magnet are set up as shown. 

## S 

## N 

## N 

## S 

## S 

## N 

## P Q R 

 magnet turned around current direction reversed current direction reversed and magnet turned around 

 Which arrangements cause a force in the same direction as the original arrangement? 

 A P, Q and R B P and Q only C P only D R only 

38 The nuclide notation for an isotope of silver is 10947 Ag. 

 How many nucleons are in a nucleus of this isotope? 

 A 47 B 62 C 109 D 156 


© UCLES 2017 0625/12/F/M/17 

39 A radioactive substance emits radiation at a rate of 600 emissions per second. Four hours later, it emits radiation at a rate of 300 emissions per second. 

 What is the half-life of the substance and what is the rate of emission after a further four hours? 

 half-life / hours 

 rate of emission after a further four hours / emissions per second 

## A 2 0 

## B 2 150 

## C 4 0 

## D 4 150 

40 A radioactive source is placed near a detector. 

 The radiation arriving at the detector from the source is measured for 10 minutes with different materials placed between the source and the detector. 

 materials placed here 

 detector (Geiger-Müller tube) 

 radioactive source 

 material between source and detector 

 radiation detected / counts 

 none 5626 

 sheet of paper 5629 

 thick sheet of aluminium 2226 

 thick sheet of lead 255 

 Which types of radiation are emitted by the source? 

 A α-particles and γ-rays 

 B α-particles only 

 C β-particles and γ-rays 

 D β-particles only 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2017 0625/12/F/M/17 

## BLANK PAGE 


