 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 16 printed pages. IB15 11_0620_13/4RP© UCLES 2015 [Turn over 

# *0977517416* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

CHEMISTRY Paper 1 Multiple Choice (^) October/November 20150620/13 Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer SheetSoft clean eraser^ 45 Minutes Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil.Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unlessthis has been done for you.DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. There areanswersChoose the A (^) ,forty Bone, C (^) you consider correct and record your choice inquestions on this paper. Answerand D. all questions. For each question there are four possible soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer.Any rough working should be done in this booklet. A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16.Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2015 0620/13/O/N/15 

1 In which process do particles move closer together but remain in motion? A condensation B C diffusionevaporation D freezing 2 A student was asked to measure the rate of reaction between dilute hydrochloric acid and marblechips at different temperatures. Some of the apparatus used is shown. 

Which two other pieces of apparatus would be needed? A balance and pipette B C balance and stopclockbeaker and stopclock D burette and pipette 3 Argon, Ar, has a higher relative atomic mass than potassium, K, but appears before it in thePeriodic Table. 

 K Ar Why is argon listed before potassium in the Periodic Table? A Argon has fewer neutrons than potassium. B C Argon has fewer protons than potassium.Argon has more neutrons than potassium. D Argon has more protons than potassium. 


© UCLES 2015 0620/13/O/N/15 [Turn over 

4 In the following diagrams, X and Y are atoms of different elements.Which diagram correctly shows the arrangement of outer electrons in a molecule of methane? 

## X Y 

## Y 

## Y 

## A 

## X Y 

## Y 

## B 

## Y X Y 

## Y 

## Y 

## C 

## Y X Y 

## Y 

## Y 

## D 

5 What do the nuclei of 11 Hhydrogen atoms contain? A B electrons and neutronselectrons and protons C D neutrons onlyprotons only 

6 The electronic structures of atoms X and Y are shown. 

X Y X and Y form a covalent compound. What is its formula? A XY 5 B^ XY 3 C^ XY^ D^ X 3 Y 7 Copper(The left hand side of the balanced equation for this reaction is:II) oxide reacts with ammonia. 

 What completes the equation?3CuO + 2NH^3 → 

A B 3Cu + 2HNO3Cu + 2N + 3H (^32) O C D 3Cu + N3Cu + 2NO + 3H 2 + 3H 2 O 2 O 


© UCLES 2015 0620/13/O/N/15 

8 Whatelectrodes? are the electrode products when molten silver iodide is electrolysed between inert 

A hydrogencathode^ anodeiodine B C iodinesilver iodinesilver D silver oxygen 9 The diagram shows a section of an overhead power cable. 

 aluminium 

 steel ceramic 

Which statement explains why a particular substance is used? A Aluminium has a low density and is a good conductor of electricity. B C Ceramic is a good conductor of electricity.Steel can rust in damp air. D Steel is more dense than aluminium. 10 Which reaction is endothermic? A the burning of magnesium ribbon B C the combustion of methanethe decomposition of calcium carbonate D the reaction of water with anhydrous copper(II) sulfate 


© UCLES 2015 0620/13/O/N/15 [Turn over 

11 A metal reacts with an aqueous solution. The graph shows the temperature before, during and after the reaction. 

 time 

 temperature 

 Which row describes the reaction? A combustionreaction^ energy changeendothermic 

B C (^) thermal decompositioncombustion (^) endothermicexothermic D thermal decomposition exothermic 12 Which of the following changes decreases the rate of the reaction between magnesium and dilutehydrochloric acid? 12 diluting the acidusing larger pieces of magnesium A 1, 2 and 3^3 cooling the mixture B C 1 and 2 only1 and 3 only D 2 and 3 only 13 The element vanadium, V, forms several oxides. In which change is oxidation taking place? A B VOV 2 O 2 5 →→ VVO 2 O 23 C D VV 22 OO 33 →→ VOV 2 O 5 


© UCLES 2015 0620/13/O/N/15 

14 If anhydrous copper( A blue to pink II) sulfate is added to water, which colour change is observed? B C blue to whitepink to blue D white to blue 15 Element X is in Group I of the Periodic Table.Which row shows the type of oxide and whether element X is metallic or non-metallic? 

type of oxide (^) non-metallicmetallic or A B acidicacidic (^) non-metallicmetallic C D basicbasic (^) non-metallicmetallic 16 Three liquids, P, Q and R, are added to a mixture of hydrochloric acid and Universal Indicatorsolution. The following observations are made. PQ the colour of the indicator turns purple.the colour of the indicator does not change. What are P, Q and R?R^ there is effervescence and the indicator turns blue. A sodium carbonateP^ Q^ R B sodium hydroxidesolution water^ sodium hydroxidesolution C solutionwater sodium carbonatewater^ sodium carbonatesolution D water sodium hydroxidesolution sodium hydroxidesolution solution sodium carbonatesolution 


© UCLES 2015 0620/13/O/N/15 [Turn over 

17 Which property is A It reacts with a carbonate to form carbon dioxide. not characteristic of a base? B C It reacts with an acid to form a salt.It reacts with an ammonium salt to form ammonia. D It turns universal indicator paper blue. 18 Zinc sulfate is a soluble salt and can be prepared by reacting excess zinc carbonate with dilutesulfuric acid. Which piece of equipment would A beaker not be required in the preparation of zinc sulfate crystals? B C condenserevaporating dish D filter funnel 19 An element, X, is a dark grey crystalline solid at room temperature. It has a melting point of 114 °C and a density of 4.9 g / cm^3. When heated gently it forms a purple vapour. Where in the Periodic Table is X found? **B**^ **A C D** 


© UCLES 2015 0620/13/O/N/15 

20 J and K are two elements from the same period in the Periodic Table. The table gives some properties of J and K. appearance shiny greyJ^ dull yellowK 

electrical conductivity when solidmalleability malleablegood (^) brittlepoor Which statement about J and K is correct? A J forms an acidic oxide. B C J is found to the left of K in the Periodic Table.K forms positive ions when it reacts. D K is more metallic than J. 21 The table gives information about four elements. Which element is a transition metal? conductivityelectrical density ing / cm^3 melting pointin °C A B goodgood 0.977.86 153598 C D poorpoor 2.333.12 (^1410) –7 22 Hydrogen and helium have both been used to fill balloons. Which property of helium makes it the preferred choice to hydrogen? A easily compressed into a gas cylinder B C forms monatomic moleculeslower density D unreactive 


© UCLES 2015 0620/13/O/N/15 [Turn over 

23 Which statement is true for A Their atoms lose one or more electrons when they react. all metals? B C They are brittle.They do not conduct electricity when solid. D They melt at low temperatures when they are heated. 24 The diagrams show what happens when three different metals are added to water. 

## X Y Z 

 bubblesof gas flame 

 What are X, Y and Z? A calcium^ X^ copperY^ potassiumZ 

B C (^) potassiumcopper calciumcalcium potassiumcopper D potassium copper calcium 25 The table show three uses of aluminium and a reason why aluminium is used for that purpose. 1 aircraft manufactureuse^ high tensile strengthreason 23 overhead electricity cablesfood containers resistance to corrosionlow density Which reasons explain the use? A 1, 2 and 3 B C 1 and 2 only1 and 3 only D 2 and 3 only 


© UCLES 2015 0620/13/O/N/15 

26 Which conditions are necessary to make mild steel from iron? A add calcium oxide and blow oxygen through it B C heat with calcium oxideheat with carbon and limestone D heat with nickel and chromium 27 Which statements about water are correct? 12 Household water may contain salts in solution.Water for household use is filtered to remove soluble impurities. 34 Water is treated with chlorine to kill bacteria.Water is used in industry for cooling. A B 1, 2, 3 and 41, 2 and 3 only C D 1, 3 and 4 only2, 3 and 4 only 

28 The diagram shows the flame produced from burning a hydrocarbon, acetylene, in a weldingtorch. 

 X 

 ACETYLENE 

 Which gas is X? A hydrogen B C methanenitrogen D oxygen 


© UCLES 2015 0620/13/O/N/15 [Turn over 

29 Carbon monoxide is an air pollutant produced when petrol is burned in a car engine. Why is carbon monoxide considered to be an air pollutant? A It causes climate change. B C It causes the corrosion of buildings.It is a significant greenhouse gas. D It is poisonous. 30 Which compound is A ammonium sulfate, (NH not a fertiliser? B calcium hydroxide, Ca(OH)^4 )^2 SO 2 4 C D potassium chloride, KCurea, CO(NH 2 ) 2 l 

31 In which reaction is carbon dioxide A complete combustion of petrol not produced? B C hydrochloric acid reacting with magnesiumrespiration D thermal decomposition of limestone 


© UCLES 2015 0620/13/O/N/15 

32 The apparatus shown is set up and left for a week. damp iron wool air 

 water Which diagram shows the level of the water at the end of the week? A B C D 

33 Unwanted vegetation is sometimes placed in a bin where it decays to form compost. Thiscompost can be used to fertilise soils. Which gas is likely to be present in a higher percentage inside the bin than in the air outside thebin? A B carbon monoxidemethane C D oxygensulfur dioxide 


© UCLES 2015 0620/13/O/N/15 [Turn over 

34 A student is asked to draw a diagram showing the uses of limestone. 

 limestone 

 makingcement making lime 

 added, with hematite,to a blast furnace 

## 1 2 

## 3 

Which numbered lines show a correct use of limestone? A 1, 2 and 3 B C 1 and 2 only1 and 3 only D 2 and 3 only 35 What are the names of the compounds shown in the reaction scheme below? H C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

 butaneH 

## H 

## H 

## C C C H H C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## W H X 

## C C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H C 

## H CH 

## H 

## H 

## YOH 

## H CH C H 

## H 

## O 

## Z 

## C OH 

 cracking + 

 oxygen 

 steam 

 A ethane^ W^ etheneX^ ethanolY^ ethanoic acidZ B C ethaneethene etheneethane ethanoic acidethanol ethanoic acidethanol D ethene ethane ethanoic acid ethanol 


© UCLES 2015 0620/13/O/N/15 

36 Which row describes the formation of a polymer? 

A monomerethane poly(ethane)polymer B C ethaneethene poly(ethene)poly(ethane) D ethene poly(ethene) 37 Which row shows the correct use of a fraction obtained by the fractional distillation of petroleum? A bitumenfraction^ making waxes and polishesuse 

B C (^) kerosenefuel oil (^) fuel for shipsaircraft fuel D naphtha making chemicals 38 Ethanol can be formed by 12 fermentationreaction between steam and ethene Which of these processes uses a catalyst? A ^1 ^2 B C   D   


© UCLES 2015 0620/13/O/N/15 

39 The structures of four compounds are shown. 

 H C 

## H 

## H 

## WH 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## C C H C 

## H 

## H 

## X 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## C C H 

## H C 

## H 

## H 

## HY 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## C C C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H C C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## Z 

Which are members of the same homologous series? A W, X, Y and Z B C W and X onlyW, Y and Z only D X and Z only 40 During the process of cracking hydrocarbons, an ....... 1 ....... is converted into an ....... 2 ........ The presence of an ....... 3 ....... can be shown by a visible reaction with ....... 4 ........ Which words complete gaps 1, 2, 3 and 4? A alkane^1 alkene^2 alkene^3 bromine^4 

B C alkanealkene alkenealkane alkenealkane (^) brominesteam D alkene alkane alkane steam 


To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeInternational Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download atwww.cie.org.uk after the live examination series. © UCLES 2015 0620/13/O/N/15 

 Group 

(^140) **Ce** Cerium 58 141 **Pr** Praseodymium 59 (^144) **Nd** Neodymium 60 **Pm** Promethium 61 (^150) **Sm** Samarium 62 (^152) **Eu** Europium 63 (^157) **Gd** Gadolinium 64 (^159) **Tb** Terbium 65 (^162) **Dy** Dysprosium 66 (^165) **Ho** Holmium 67 167 **Er** Erbium 68 (^169) **Tm** Thulium 69 (^173) **Yb** Ytterbium 70 (^175) **Lu** Lutetium 71 (^232) **Th** Thorium 90 **Pa** Protactinium 91 238^ **U** Uranium 92 **Np** Neptunium 93 **Pu** Plutonium 94 **Am** Americium 95 **Cm** Curium 96 **Bk** Berkelium 97 **Cf** Californium 98 **Es** Einsteinium 99 **Fm** Fermium 100 **Md** Mendelevium 101 **No** Nobelium 102 **Lr** Lawrencium 103 (^1) **H** Hydrogen 1 (^7) **Li** Lithium 3 23 **Na** Sodium 11 (^24) **Mg** Magnesium 1240 **Ca** Calcium 20 (^45) **Sc** Scandium 21 (^48) **Ti** Titanium 22 51 **V** Vanadium 23 (^52) **Cr** Chromium 24 (^55) **Mn** Manganese 25 (^56) **Fe** Iron 26 (^59) **Co** Cobalt 27 (^59) **Ni** Nickel 28 (^64) **Cu** Copper 29 (^65) **Zn** Zinc 30 11 **B** Boron 5 27 **A** **_l_** Aluminium 1370 **Ga** Gallium 31 (^12) **C** Carbon 6 14 **N** Nitrogen 7 (^16) **O** Oxygen 8 19 **F** Fluorine 9 (^28) **Si** Silicon 14 31 **P** Phosphorus 15 32 **S** Sulfur 16 35.5 **C** **_l_** Chlorine 17 (^4) **He** Helium 2 20 **Ne** Neon 10 40 **Ar** Argon 18 (^73) **Ge** Germanium 32 (^75) **As** Arsenic 33 (^79) **Se** Selenium 34 (^80) **Br** Bromine 35 (^84) **Kr** Krypton 36 39 **K** Potassium 19 (^88) **Sr** Strontium 38 89 **Y** Yttrium 39 (^91) **Zr** Zirconium 40 (^93) **Nb** Niobium 41 (^96) **Mo** Molybdenum 42 **Tc** Technetium 43 (^101) **Ru** Ruthenium 44 (^103) **Rh** Rhodium 45 (^106) **Pd** Palladium 46 (^108) **Ag** Silver 47 (^112) **Cd** Cadmium 48 (^115) **In** Indium 49 (^119) **Sn**^ Tin 50 (^122) **Sb** Antimony 51 (^128) **Te** Tellurium 52 127^ **I** Iodine 53 (^131) **Xe** Xenon 54 (^137) **Ba** Barium 56 (^139) **La** Lanthanum 57 * 178 **Hf** Hafnium 72 (^181) **Ta** Tantalum 73 184 **W** Tungsten 74 (^186) **Re** Rhenium 75 (^190) **Os** Osmium 76 (^192) **Ir** Iridium 77 195 **Pt** Platinum 78 (^197) **Au** Gold 79 (^201) **Hg** Mercury 80 204 **T** **_l_** Thallium 81 (^207) **Pb** Lead 82 209 **Bi** Bismuth 83 **Po** Polonium 84 **At** Astatine 85 **Rn** Radon 86 **Fr** Francium 87 (^227) **Ac** Actinium 89 (^9) **Be** Beryllium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ 0 (^85) **Rb** Rubidium 37133 **Cs** Caesium 55 (^226) **Ra** Radium 88 The volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). a **X** b a = relative atomic mass= atomic symbol **X**^ b = proton (atomic) number *58-71 Lanthanoid series90-103 Actinoid seriesKey **DATA SHEET The Periodic Table of the Elements** 


