* 3 1 0 3 6 1 1 4 7 2 * 

 This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. 

 DC (ST/JG) 153500/3 © UCLES 2018 [Turn over 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

#### ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/13 

 Paper 1 October/November 2018 2 hours Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all the questions. Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 


© UCLES 2018 0606/13/O/N/18 

 Mathematical Formulae 

#### 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

_x_ (^) _a b b ac_ 2 

#### !^24 

#### = 

#### 

### . 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( _n_ 

# 1 ) a 

_n_ –1 (^) _b_ + 

# ( 

 n 

# 2 ) a 

_n_ –2 (^) _b_ (^2) + … + 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) a 

_n_ – _r_ (^) _br_ (^) + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( _n_ 

# r ) =^ 

 n! ( n – r )! r! 

#### . 

#### 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ 

 sin^2 A + cos^2 A = 1 

 sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A 

 cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC_ 

 a sin A =^ 

 b sin B =^ 

 c sin C 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

 ∆ = 

 1 2 bc^ sin^ A 


© UCLES 2018 0606/13/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**1 (a)** In the expansion of ( 2 + _px_ )^5 the coefficient of _x_^3 is equal to 258. Find the value of the constant _p_. [3] 

 (b) Find the term independent of x in the expansion of x x 

#### 2 

#### 4 

#### 2 1 

 2 

 8 e + o.^ [3] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/13/O/N/18 

#### 2 

 r cm 

#### O 

 i rad 

#### P Q 

 The diagram shows a sector POQ of a circle, centre O , radius r cm, where angle POQ = i radians. The perimeter of the sector is 20 cm. 

 (i) Show that the area, A cm^2 , of the sector is given by A = 10 r r^2. [3] 

 It is given that r can vary and that A has a maximum value. 

 (ii) Find the value of i for which A has a maximum value. [3] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/13/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**3 Do not use a calculator in this question.** 

 In this question, all lengths are in centimetres. 

 A triangle ABC is such that angle B = 90 °, AB = 5 3 + 5 and BC = 5 3 5. 

 (i) Find, in its simplest surd form, the length of AC. [3] 

 (ii) Find tan BCA , giving your answer in the form a + b 3 , where a and b are integers. [3] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/13/O/N/18 

**4** In this question, the units of _x_ are radians and the units of _y_ are centimetres. 

 It is given that y = ( 1 + cos 3 x )^10. 

 (i) Find the value of x 

 y d 

 d when x = 2 r. [4] 

 Given also that y is increasing at a rate of 6 cm s−1^ when x = r 2 , 

 (ii) find the corresponding rate of change of x. [2] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/13/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**5 (i)** Show that log 9 4 = log 32. [2] 

 (ii) Hence solve log 9 4 + log 3 x = 3. [3] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/13/O/N/18 

**6** A particle _P_ is moving in a straight line such that its displacement, _s_ m, from a fixed point _O_ at time _t_ s, is given by _s_ = 12 e 0 5^.^ _t_ + 4 _t_ 12. 

 (i) Find the value of t when P is instantaneously at rest. [3] 

 (ii) Find an expression for the acceleration of P at time t s. [2] 

 (iii) Find the value of s when the acceleration of P is 0.3 ms−2. [3] 

 (iv) Explain why the acceleration of the particle will always be positive. [1] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/13/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

#### 7 

#### A B 

#### D 

#### O C 

 The diagram shows a quadrilateral OABC. The point D lies on OB such that OD = 2 DB and AD = mAC , where m is a scalar quantity. 

 OA = a OB = b OC = c 

 (i) Find AD in terms of m , a and c. [1] 

 (ii) Find AD in terms of a and b. [2] 

 (iii) Given that 15 a = 16 b 9 c , find the value of m. [3] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/13/O/N/18 

**8** f ( ) _x_ = 5 + sin _x_ 4 for 0 G _x_ G 2 r radians 

 g ( ) x = x r 3 for x !R 

 (i) Write down the range of f ( ) x. [2] 

 (ii) Find f -^1 ( ) x and write down its range. [3] 

 (iii) Solve 2 fg ( ) x = 11. [4] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/13/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**9** Find the equation of the normal to the curve 

 ln( ) y x 

 3 x 1 2 

 2 = 

#### + 

 at the point where x = 2 , giving your answer 

 in the form y = mx + c , where m and c are correct to 2 decimal places. You must show all your working. [8] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/13/O/N/18 

#### 10 

 x 

 y = 12 + x – x^2 

 y 

#### O 

#### B 

#### A 

 y = x + 8 

 The diagram shows the curve y = 12 + x x^2 intersecting the line y = x + 8 at the points A and B. 

 (i) Find the coordinates of the points A and B. [3] 

## (ii) Find y ( 12 + x x^2 )d x. [2] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/13/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

 (iii) Showing all your working, find the area of the shaded region. [4] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/13/O/N/18 

**11** The polynomial p ( ) _x_ = _ax_^3 + 17 _x_^2 + _bx_ 8 is divisible by 2 _x_ 1 and has a remainder of 35 when divided by _x_ + 3. 

 (i) By finding the value of each of the constants a and b , verify that a = b. [4] 

 Using your values of a and b , 

 (ii) find p ( ) x in the form ( 2 x 1 q) ( ) x , where q ( ) x is a quadratic expression, [2] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/13/O/N/18 

 (iii) factorise p ( ) x completely, [1] 

 (iv) solve a sin 3 i + 17 sin 2 i + b sin i 8 = 0 for 0 ° 1 i 1180 °. [3] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/13/O/N/18 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

#### BLANK PAGE 


