* 7 2 0 6 8 4 0 8 6 8 * 

 This document consists of 16 printed pages. DC (ST/JG) 153501/2 © UCLES 2018 [Turn over 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

#### ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/12 

 Paper 1 October/November 2018 2 hours Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. Answer all the questions. Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 


© UCLES 2018 0606/12/O/N/18 

 Mathematical Formulae 

#### 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

 x b^ 2 ba^^4 ac 

#### !^2 

### = -^ -^. 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( _n_ 

# 1 ) a 

_n_ –1 (^) _b_ + 

# ( 

 n 

# 2 ) a 

_n_ –2 (^) _b_ (^2) + … + 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) a 

_n_ – _r_ (^) _br_ (^) + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( _n_ 

# r ) =^ 

 n! ( n – r )! r! 

#### . 

#### 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ 

 sin^2 A + cos^2 A = 1 sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC_ 

 a sin A =^ 

 b sin B =^ 

 c sin C 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

 ∆ = 12 bc sin A 


© UCLES 2018 0606/12/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**1** Solve 1 + 2 sin ( _x_ + 50 °) = 0 for 180 ° G _x_ G 180 °. [4] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/12/O/N/18 

**2** Find the equation of the curve which has a gradient of 4 at the point ( , 0 3 )and is such that 

 x 

_y_ (^) 5 d d (^) e _x_ 2 2 = + 2. [5] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/12/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**3 (i)** On the axes below, sketch the graph of _y_ = 6 3 _x_ , showing the coordinates of the points where the graph meets the coordinate axes. [2] 

#### 10 

#### 12 

#### 8 

#### 4 

#### 6 

#### 2 

#### 0 

#### –4 

#### –2 

#### –6 

#### –8 

#### –10 

#### –12 

 x 

 y 

#### –2 –1 1 2 3 4 5 6 

 (ii) Solve 6 3 x = 2. [3] 

 (iii) Hence find the values of x for which 6 3 x 22. [1] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/12/O/N/18 

**4** _y_ = _x_^3 ln( 2 _x_ + 1 ) 

**(i)** Find the value of (^) _x y_ d d when _x_ = 0 3.. You must show all your working. [4] **(ii)** Hence find the approximate increase in _y_ when _x_ increases from 0.3 to 0 3. + _h_ , where _h_ is small. [1] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/12/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**5** The 7th^ term in the expansion of ( _a_ + _bx_ )^12 in ascending powers of _x_ is 924 _x_ 6. It is given that _a_ and _b_ are positive constants. 

**(i)** Show that _b_ = (^) _a_^1. [2] The 6th^ term in the expansion of ( _a_ + _bx_ )^12 in ascending powers of _x_ is 198 _x_ 5. **(ii)** Find the value of _a_ and of _b_. [4] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/12/O/N/18 

**6 (i)** Find (^) dd _x_^ ( 5 _x_ 2 125 )^3 2 

-. [2] 

 (ii) Using your answer to part (i) , find x ( 5 x^2 125 ) 3 d x 

 1 

## y -^ -.^ [2] 

 (iii) Hence find 6 x ( 5 x^2125 ) d x 

 10 31 

## y -^ -.^ [2] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/12/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**7 (a)** The vector **v** has a magnitude of 39 units and is in the same direction as 

#### 12 

#### 5 

 e^ o 

. Write **v** in the 

 form 

 a b 

 e o, where a and b are constants. [2] 

 (b) Vectors p and q are such that 

 r s 

**p** = (^) _r_ 6 

#### + 

#### + 

e o (^) and _r_ **q** (^) _s_ 

#### 5 1 

= (^2 1) 

#### + 

#### 

 e o, where r and s are constants. Given that 

 2 p 3 q 

#### 0 

+ = (^0) e o, find the value of _r_ and of _s_. [4] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/12/O/N/18 

#### 8 

 a 

**A** (^) 4 _a_ 

#### 3 

= (^) + 4 e o **(i)** Find the values of the constant _a_ for which **A** -^1 does not exist. [3] **(ii)** Given that _a_ = 4 , find **A** -^1. [2] **(iii)** Hence find the matrix **B** such that **AB** 

#### 2 

#### 4 

#### 3 

= (^) 5 e o. [3] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/12/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**9** The polynomial p ( ) _x_ = _ax_^3 + _bx_^2 + _cx_ 9 is divisible by _x_ + 3. It is given that p l( )^0 = 36 and p ll^ ( ) 0 = 86. 

 (i) Find the value of each of the constants a , b and c. [6] 

 (ii) Using your values of a , b and c , find the remainder when p ( ) x is divided by 2 x 1. [2] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/12/O/N/18 

#### 10 

 y 

(^0) _x y_ = _a_ + 4 cos _bx_ 

#### 6 

#### 6 

#### M 

 r P 

 The diagram shows part of the curve y = a + 4 cos bx , where a and b are positive constants. The curve meets the y -axis at the point ( ,0 6 ) and the x -axis at the point b^ r 6 , 0 l. The curve meets the x -axis again at the point P and has a minimum at the point M. 

 (i) Find the value of a and of b. [3] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/12/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

 Using your values of a and b find, 

 (ii) the exact coordinates of P , [2] 

 (iii) the exact coordinates of M. [2] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/12/O/N/18 

#### 11 

 r cm 

 O 

 i rad 

_P_ (^) _Q_ The diagram shows the sector _OPQ_ of a circle, centre _O_ , radius _r_ cm, where angle _POQ_ = _i_ radians. The perimeter of the sector is 10 cm. **(i)** Show that area, _A_ cm^2 , of the sector is given by ( ) 

#### A^50 

 2 i^2 

 =^ i + 

#### . [5] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/12/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

 It is given that i can vary and A has a maximum value. 

 (ii) Find the maximum value of A. [5] 

 Question 12 is printed on the next page. 


© UCLES 2018 0606/12/O/N/18 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

**12** The line _y_ = 2 _x_ + 5 intersects the curve _y_ + _xy_ = 5 at the points _A_ and _B_. Find the coordinates of the point where the perpendicular bisector of the line _AB_ intersects the line _y_ = _x_. [9] 


