* 7 1 8 0 5 0 4 1 3 6 * 

 This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. 

 DC (ST/SW) 153497/2 © UCLES 2018 [Turn over 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

### ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/23 

 Paper 2 October/November 2018 2 hours Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all the questions. Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 


© UCLES 2018 0606/23/O/N/18 

 Mathematical Formulae 

### 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

_x_ (^) _a b b ac_ 2 

### !^24 

### = 

### 

## . 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( _n_ 

# 1 ) a 

_n_ –1 (^) _b_ + 

# ( 

 n 

# 2 ) a 

_n_ –2 (^) _b_ (^2) + … + 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) a 

_n_ – _r_ (^) _br_ (^) + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( _n_ 

# r ) =^ 

 n! ( n – r )! r! 

### . 

### 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ 

 sin^2 A + cos^2 A = 1 

 sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A 

 cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC_ 

 a sin A =^ 

 b sin B =^ 

 c sin C 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

 ∆ = 

 1 2 bc^ sin^ A 


© UCLES 2018 0606/23/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**1** Solve the equation 5 _x_ 3 =3 _x_ + 13. [3] 

**2** On each of the Venn diagrams below, shade the region indicated. 

_A_ (^) _B_ 

### C 

### A 

### B 

### C 

_A_ (^) _B_ 

### C 

### ( A  B  C ) ' 

### A  B  C' ( A  B )  C' 

### [3] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/23/O/N/18 

**3 (i)** Write 8 + 7 _x_ _x_^2 in the form _a_ ( _x_ _b_ )^2 , where _a_ and _b_ are constants. [3] 

 (ii) Hence state the maximum value of 8 + 7 x x^2 and the value of x at which it occurs. [2] 

 (iii) Using your answer to part (i) , or otherwise, solve the equation 8 + 7 z^2 z^4 = 0. [3] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/23/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

### 4 

### ( ) 

 y x 

 x x 

### 2 

### 1 

 d 3 d 

 2 2 =^ +^ + 4 

 (i) Find x 

 y d 

 d , given that x 

 y 1 d 

 d = when x = 1. [3] 

 (ii) Find y in terms of x , given that y = 3 when x = 1. [3] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/23/O/N/18 

**5** Given that **A** 

### 2 

### 1 

### 3 

### 4 

 = e^ o^ and B 

### 1 

### 2 

### 4 

### 5 

### = 

### 

 e o, find 

 (i) A -^1 , [2] 

 (ii) the matrix C such that CA = B , [2] 

 (iii) the matrix D such that A -^1 D + B = I. [3] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/23/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**6** Solve the simultaneous equations 

 log 2 ( x + 2 y )= 3 , 

 log 2 3 x log 2 y = 1. [5] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/23/O/N/18 

**7** A squad of 20 boys, which includes 2 sets of twins, is available for selection for a cricket team of 11 players. Calculate the number of different teams that can be selected if 

 (i) there are no restrictions, [1] 

 (ii) both sets of twins are selected, [2] 

 (iii) one set of twins is selected but neither twin from the other set is selected, [2] 

 (iv) exactly one twin from each set of twins is selected. [2] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/23/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**8** Variables _x_ and _y_ are such that when _y_^2 is plotted against e^2 _x_^ a straight line is obtained which passes through the points (1.5, 5.5) and (3.7, 12.1). Find 

 (i) y in terms of e^2 x , [3] 

 (ii) the value of y when x = 3 , [1] 

 (iii) the value of x when y = 50. [3] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/23/O/N/18 

**9 (a)** Solve 2 sin b _x_^ + 4 r l^ = 3 for 0 1 _x_ 1 r radians. [3] 

 (b) Solve 3 sec y = 4 cosec y for 0 ° 1 y 1 360 °. [3] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/23/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

 (c) Solve 7 cot z tan z = 2 cosec z for 0 ° 1 z 1 360 °. [6] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/23/O/N/18 

**10** The equation of a curve is _y_ = _x_^23 + _x_ for _x_ H3. 

**(i)** Find (^) _x y_ d d 

. [3] 

 (ii) Find the equation of the tangent to the curve y = x^23 + x at the point where x = 1. [3] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/23/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

 (iii) Find the coordinates of the turning points of the curve y = x^23 + x. [4] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/23/O/N/18 

**11** A line with equation _y_ =5 _x_ + _k_ + 5 is a tangent to a curve with equation _y_ = 7 _kx_ _x_^2. 

 (i) Find the two possible values of k. [5] 

 (ii) Find, for each of your values of k , 

**-** the equation of the tangent 

**-** the equation of the curve 

**-** the coordinates of the point of contact of the tangent and the curve. [5] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/23/O/N/18 

 (iii) Find the distance between the two points of contact. [2] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/23/O/N/18 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

### BLANK PAGE 


