 This document consists of 14 printed pages and 2 blank pages. 

 DC (ST/JG) 153499/2 © UCLES 2018 [Turn over 

* 1 2 0 7 8 0 5 8 1 3 * 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/21 Paper 2 October/November 2018 2 hours Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all the questions. Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 


© UCLES 2018 0606/21/O/N/18 

 Mathematical Formulae 

### 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

_x_ (^) _a b b ac_ 2 

### !^24 

### = 

### 

## . 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( _n_ 

# 1 ) a 

_n_ –1 (^) _b_ + 

# ( 

 n 

# 2 ) a 

_n_ –2 (^) _b_ (^2) + … + 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) a 

_n_ – _r_ (^) _br_ (^) + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( _n_ 

# r ) =^ 

 n! ( n – r )! r! 

### . 

### 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ 

 sin^2 A + cos^2 A = 1 

 sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A 

 cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC_ 

 a sin A =^ 

 b sin B =^ 

 c sin C 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

 ∆ = 

 1 2 bc^ sin^ A 


© UCLES 2018 0606/21/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**1** Solve the inequality ( 2 _x_ )( _x_ + 9 ) 110. [4] 

**2 (a)** Solve (^3 10) _x_ b 2 1 l (^) =. [3] **(b)** Solve 2 e 1 -^2 _y_^^ = 3 e^3 _y_^ +^2. [4] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/21/O/N/18 

**3 Do not use a calculator in this question.** 

 (a) Simplify ( 2 + 2 5 )( 4 2 3 5 ), giving your answer in the form a + b c , where a , b and c are integers. [3] 

 (b) Simplify 3 

### 4 3 6 

### 2 

### 

### + 

 , giving your answer in the form p 3 + q 2 , where p and q are integers. [4] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/21/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**4** Solve sec _x_ = cot _x_ 5 tan _x_ for 0 ° 1 _x_ 1 360 °. [6] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/21/O/N/18 

### 5 A 

### 3 

### 1 

### 2 

### 1 

### = 

### 

 e o. 

 (i) Find A^2. [2] 

 (ii) Find constants p and q such that p A^2 + q A = I. [4] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/21/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**6** A 5-digit code is to be formed from the digits 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Each digit can be used once only in any code. Find how many codes can be formed if 

 (i) the first digit of the code is 6 and the other four digits are odd, [2] 

 (ii) each of the first three digits is even, [2] 

 (iii) the first and last digits are prime. [2] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/21/O/N/18 

**7 (i)** Show that (^1) cos^1 _x_ (^1) + cos^1 _x_ = 2 cosec _x_ cot _x_. [4] **(ii)** Hence solve the equation (^1) 1 cos _x_ (^1) + cos^1 _x_ = sec _x_ for 0 G _x_ G 2 r radians. [4] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/21/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

### 8 

 y 

 0 5 x 

### B 

### A 

 y = x + e^5 -^2 x 

 The diagram shows part of the curve y = x + e 5 -^2 x , the normal to the curve at the point A and the line x = 5. The normal to the curve at A meets the y -axis at the point B. The x -coordinate of A is 2.5. 

 (i) Find the equation of the normal AB. [4] 

 (ii) Showing all your working, find the area of the shaded region. [6] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/21/O/N/18 

**9** In this question, all lengths are in metres. 

 y 

 2 r 

 The diagram shows a window formed by a semi-circle of radius r on top of a rectangle with dimensions 2 r by y. The total perimeter of the window is 5. 

 (i) Find y in terms of r. [2] 

**(ii)** Show that the total area of the window is _A_ 5 _r_ (^) 2 _r_^ 2 _r_ r^2 2 = -. [2] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/21/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

 (iii) Given that r can vary, find the value of r which gives a maximum area of the window and find this area. (You are not required to show that this area is a maximum.) [5] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/21/O/N/18 

**10** The line _y_ = 12 2 _x_ is a tangent to two curves. Each curve has an equation of the form _y_ = _k_ + 6 + _kx_ _x_^2 , where _k_ is a constant. 

 (i) Find the two values of k. [5] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/21/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

 The line y = 12 2 x is a tangent to one curve at the point A and the other curve at the point B. 

 (ii) Find the coordinates of A and of B. [3] 

 (iii) Find the equation of the perpendicular bisector of AB. [3] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/21/O/N/18 

### 11 

### R 

### N 

 x H 

 x 

 x – 2 

### 15 

### 9 

 There are 70 girls in a year group at a school. The Venn diagram gives some information about the numbers of these girls who play rounders ( R ), hockey ( H ) and netball ( N ). 

 n( R ) = 28 n( H ) = 38 n( N ) = 35. 

 Find the value of x and hence the number of girls who play netball only. [6] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/21/O/N/18 

### BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2018 0606/21/O/N/18 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

### BLANK PAGE 


