* 0 0 8 8 9 4 2 7 8 0 * 

 This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. DC (RW/SG) 153502/3© UCLES 2018 [Turn over 

## ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/11 

 Paper 1 October/November 2018 2 hours Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. Answer all the questions. Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 


© UCLES 2018 0606/11/O/N/18 

 Mathematical Formulae 

## 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, x b^ 2 ba^^4 ac 

## !^2 

## = -^ -^. 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( _n_ 1 ) _an_ –1^ _b_ + (^) ( _n_ 2 ) _an_ –2^ _b_^2 + … + (^) ( _nr_ ) _an_ – _r_^ _br_^ + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( _nr_ ) = (^) ( _n_ – _n_! _r_ )! _r_!. 

## 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ 

 sin^2 A + cos^2 A = 1 sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC a_ sin _A_ =^ 

 b sin B =^ 

 c sin C 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A ∆ = 12 bc sin A 


© UCLES 2018 0606/11/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**1 (a)** On the axes below, sketch the graph of _y_ = 3 cos 2 _x_ 1 , for 0 ° G _x_ ° G 360 °. 

## 5 4 3 2 1 0 

## –1 

## –2 

## –3 

## –4 

## –5 

## –6 

 x 

 y 

## 90 180 270 360 

## [3] 

 (b) Given that y^ =^4 sin^6 x ,^ write down (i) the amplitude of y , [1] 

 (ii) the period of y. [1] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/11/O/N/18 

**2** p ( ) _x_ = 2 _x_^3 + 5 _x_^2 + 4 _x_ + _a_ 

 q ( ) x = 4 x^2 + 3 ax + b Given that p( x ) has a remainder of 2 when divided by 2 x + 1 and that q( x ) is divisible by x + 2 , (i) find the value of each of the constants a and b. [3] 

 Given that r ( ) x = p ( ) x q( ) x and using your values of a and b , (ii) find the exact remainder when r( x ) is divided by 3 x 2. [3] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/11/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**3** The coefficient of _x_^2 in the expansion of ( 2 _x_ )( 3 + _kx_ )^6 is equal to 972. Find the possible values of the constant _k_. [6] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/11/O/N/18 

**4 (i)** Write _x_^2 9 _x_ + 8 in the form ( _x_ _p_ )^2 _q_ , where _p_ and _q_ are constants. [2] 

 (ii) Hence write down the coordinates of the minimum point on the curve y = x^2 9 x + 8. [1] 

 (iii) On the axes below, sketch the graph of y = x^2 9 x + 8 , showing the coordinates of the points where the curve meets the coordinate axes. 

## 20 

## 16 

## 8 

## 12 

## 4 

## 0 

## –8 

## –4 

## –12 

## –16 

 x 

 y 

## –2 2 4 6 8 10 

## [3] 

 (iv) Write down the value of k for which x^2 9 x + 8 = k has exactly 3 solutions. [1] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/11/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

## 5 

 r cm O^ θ 

## A 

## B 

 rad 

 The diagram shows a circle with centre O and radius r cm. The minor arc AB is such that angle AOB is i radians. The area of the minor sector AOB is 48 cm^2. 

**(i)** Show that _i_ = (^96) _r_ 2. [2] **(ii)** Given that the minor arc _AB_ has length 12 cm, find the value of _r_ and of _i_. [3] **(iii)** Using your values of _r_ and _i_ , find the area of the shaded region. [2] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/11/O/N/18 

**6** A curve has equation _y_ ln( 5 2 _x x_^23 ) 

 2 

= (^) +^ +^. **(i)** Show that (^) dd _xy_^ =45 ln 3 when _x_ = 0. [4] **(ii)** Hence find the equation of the tangent to the curve at the point where _x_ = 0. [2] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/11/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**7 (a)** Express 2 + 3 lg _x_ lg _y_ as a single logarithm to base 10. [3] 

**(b) (i)** Solve 6 _x_ + 7 (^) _x_^3 = 0. [2] **(ii)** Hence, given that 6 log (^) _a_ 3 + 7 3 log 3 _a_ = 0 , find the possible values of _a_. [4] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/11/O/N/18 

**8 (i)** Find (^) dd _x_^ ( 5 _x_ 2 + 4 )^23. [2] **(ii)** Hence find (^) y _x_ ( 5 _x_^2 + 4 ) 21 d _x_. [2] Given that (^) y 0^ _a_^ _x_ ( 5 _x_^2 + 4 ) 21 d _x_ = 1519 , **(iii)** find the value of the positive constant _a_. [4] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/11/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**9** Variables _s_ and _t_ are such that _s_ = 4 _t_ + 3e _t_^. 

 (i) Find the value of s when t = 0. [1] 

**(ii)** Find the exact value of _t_ when (^) dd _s_^ _t_^ = 2. [4] **(iii)** Find the approximate increase in _s_ when _t_ increases from ln 5 to ln 5 + _h_ , where _h_ is small. [3] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/11/O/N/18 

**10** Particle _A_ is at the point with position vector (^) -^25 

## J 

## L 

## KK^ N 

## P 

 OO at time t = 0 and moves with a speed of 10 ms-^1 in the 

same direction as (^34) 

## J 

## L 

## KKN 

## P 

## OO. 

**(i)** Given that _A_ is at the point with position vector (^38) _a_ 

## J 

## L 

## KK N 

## P 

 OO when t = 6 s, find the value of the constant a. [3] 

Particle _B_ is at the point with position vector (^1637) 

## J 

## L 

## KK N 

## P 

 OO at time t = 0 and moves with velocity J^42 L 

## KKN 

## P 

 OO ms-^1. (ii) Write down, in terms of t , the position vector of B at time t s. [1] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/11/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

 (iii) Verify that particles A and B collide. [4] 

 (iv) Write down the position vector of the point of collision. [1] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/11/O/N/18 

**11 (a)** f ( ) _x_ = 3 cos 2 _x_ for 0 G _x_ G r 2. 

 (i) Write down the range of f. [2] 

 (ii) Find the exact value of f -^1 (. )2 5. [3] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/11/O/N/18 

 (b) g ( ) x = 3 x^2 for x! R. Find the exact solutions of g^2 ( ) x =6. [4] 


© UCLES 2018 0606/11/O/N/18 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge InternationalExaminations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge LocalExaminations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

## BLANK PAGE 


