* 5 2 1 2 8 9 6 7 1 7 * 

 This syllabus is regulated for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 8 printed pages. 

 DC (NF/CGW) 171389/3 © UCLES 2019 [Turn over 

### PHYSICS 0625/53 

 Paper 5 Practical Test May/June 2019 CONFIDENTIAL INSTRUCTIONS 

 This document gives details of how to prepare for and administer the practical exam. 

 The information in this document and the identity of any materials supplied by Cambridge International are confidential and must NOT reach candidates either directly or indirectly. 

 The supervisor must complete the report at the end of this document and return it with the scripts. 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

 If you have any queries regarding these confidential instructions, contact Cambridge International stating the centre number, the syllabus and component number and the nature of the query. 

 email info@cambridgeinternational.org phone +44 1223 553554 fax +44 1223 553558 


© UCLES 2019 0625/53/CI/M/J/19 

# General information about practical exams 

Centres must follow the guidance on science practical exams given in the _Cambridge Handbook_. 

## Safety 

Supervisors must follow national and local regulations relating to safety and first aid. 

Only those procedures described in the question paper should be attempted. 

Supervisors must inform candidates that materials and apparatus used in the exam should be treated with caution. Suitable eye protection should be used where necessary. 

## Before the exam 

## • The packets containing the question papers must not be opened before the exam. 

## • It is assumed that standard school laboratory facilities, as indicated in the Guide to Planning 

 Practical Science , will be available. 

## • Spare materials and apparatus for the tasks set must be available for candidates, if required. 

## During the exam 

## • It must be made clear to candidates at the start of the exam that they may request spare 

 materials and apparatus for the tasks set. 

## • Where specified, the supervisor must perform the experiments and record the results as 

 instructed. This must be done out of sight of the candidates, using the same materials and apparatus as the candidates. 

## • Any assistance provided to candidates must be recorded in the supervisor’s report. 

## • If any materials or apparatus need to be replaced, for example, in the event of breakage or 

 loss, this must be recorded in the supervisor’s report. 

## After the exam 

## • The supervisor must complete a report for each practical session held and each laboratory 

 used. 

## • Each packet of scripts returned to Cambridge International must contain the following items: 

## • the scripts of the candidates specified on the bar code label provided 

## • the supervisor’s results relevant to these candidates 

## • the supervisor’s reports relevant to these candidates 

## • seating plans for each practical session, referring to each candidate by candidate number 

## • the attendance register. 


© UCLES 2019 0625/53/CI/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

# Specific information for this practical exam 

**Question 1** 

**Items to be supplied by the Centre (per set of apparatus unless otherwise specified).** 

 (i) Metre rule with a scale graduated in mm. See note 1. 

 (ii) Triangular block to act as a pivot for the metre rule. This block is to stand on the bench. 

 (iii) Object of mass = 200 g, labelled M. See note 2. 

 (iv) Object of mass = 100 g, labelled U. See note 2. 

**Notes** 

**1.** The metre rule should approximately balance on the pivot, with the scale facing upwards, when     the 50.0 cm mark is over the pivot. 

**2.** The objects must be of regular shape and be able to stand on the rule.     Two 100 g stacking masses taped together would be suitable for M.     Candidates must not be able to identify the mass of U. A cube shaped piece of modelling clay or a     mass of less than 100 g covered in modelling clay would be suitable for U. 

**Action at changeover** Check that the apparatus is ready for the next candidate. 


© UCLES 2019 0625/53/CI/M/J/19 

**Question 2** 

**Items to be supplied by the Centre (per set of apparatus unless otherwise specified).** 

 (i) Two thermometers: −10°C to 110°C, graduated in 1°C intervals. 

 (ii) Clamp, boss and stand. See note 1. 

 (iii) 400 cm^3 beaker. See notes 1 and 2. 

 (iv) Boiling tube of capacity approximately 70 cm^3 or greater. See note 1. 

 (v) 100 cm^3 measuring cylinder. Larger measuring cylinders are suitable provided that candidates can measure volume to a precision of at least 10 cm^3. 

 (vi) Supply of hot water. See notes 3 & 4. 

 (vii) Supply of cold water at room temperature. See note 5. 

 (viii) Stopclock or stopwatch or wall-mounted clock showing seconds. Candidates will be required to take readings at 30-second intervals. They may use their own wristwatches. The question will refer to a stopclock. 

 (ix) Paper towels to soak up any water spills. 

**Notes** 

**1.** The apparatus is to be set up for candidates as shown in Fig. 2.1. The boiling tube must be a     small distance above the base of the beaker.     Candidates must be able easily and safely to read temperatures up to 100°C and to move the     boiling tube into the beaker. 

 boiling tube 

 beaker 

 thermometers 

 clamp stand 

 bench 

 Fig. 2.1 


© UCLES 2019 0625/53/CI/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**2.** If the beaker does not have volume markings, the 300 cm^3 level must be marked or a suitable     additional measuring cylinder supplied. 

**3.** Hot water is to be available for each candidate throughout the experiment. The hot water should be     maintained at an approximately constant temperature between 80°C and 100°C. Each candidate     will require about 400 cm^3 of hot water in total.     They must be able to pour hot water into the beaker safely. 

**4.** Candidates must be warned of the dangers of burns or scalds when using very hot water. 

**5.** Each candidate will require about 100 cm^3 of cold water. 

**Action at Changeover** Empty the water from the beaker and boiling tube. Check that the apparatus is intact and is arranged as in Fig. 2.1. 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. 


© UCLES 2019 0625/53/CI/M/J/19 

**Question 3** 

**Items to be supplied by the Centre (per set of apparatus unless otherwise specified).** 

 (i) Three 3 W resistors, one 5 Ω, labelled X, one 10 Ω, labelled Y, and another 10 Ω, labelled Z. Candidates must not be able to identify resistance values. See note 2. 

 (ii) Power supply of approximately 2 V– 3 V. See note 3. Where candidates are provided with a variable power supply, the voltage should be set by the Supervisor and fixed, e.g. taped. 

 (iii) Switch. The switch may be an integral part of the power supply. 

 (iv) Sufficient connecting leads to set up the circuit shown in Fig. 3.1, with 4 spare leads. 

 (v) Ammeter capable of measuring currents up to 2.00 A with a resolution of at least 0.05 A. See note 4. 

 (vi) Voltmeter capable of measuring up to 3.0 V with a resolution of at least 0.1 V. See note 4. 

**Notes** 

**1.** The circuit is to be set up for candidates as shown in Fig. 3.1. The voltmeter must have leads and     terminals that enable it to be connected to different parts of the circuit. 

### A 

 power supply 

### X Y Z 

### V 

 Fig. 3.1 

**2.** The resistors must have suitable terminals so that candidates are able easily and quickly to     rearrange the circuit. Spare resistors should be available. 

**3.** If cells are used, they must remain adequately charged throughout the examination. Spare cells     must be available. 

**4.** Either analogue or digital meters are suitable. Any variable settings should be set by the Supervisor     and fixed, e.g. taped. Spare meters should be available. 

**Action at changeover** Connect the circuit as shown in Fig. 3.1 and check that the circuit is working. Switch the circuit off. 

**Question 4** 

 No apparatus is required for this question. 


© UCLES 2019 0625/53/CI/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

# Supervisor’s report 

Syllabus and component number _/_ 

Centre number 

Centre name ............................................................................................................................................ 

Time of the practical session ................................................................................................................... 

Laboratory name/number ........................................................................................................................ 

**Give details of any difficulties experienced by the centre or by candidates (include the relevant candidate names and candidate numbers).** 

You must include: 

## • any difficulties experienced by the centre in the preparation of materials 

## • any difficulties experienced by candidates, e.g. due to faulty materials or apparatus 

## • any specific assistance given to candidates. 


© UCLES 2019 0625/53/CI/M/J/19 

**Declaration** 

 1 Each packet that I am returning to Cambridge International contains the following items: 

 the scripts of the candidates specified on the bar code label provided 

 the supervisor’s results relevant to these candidates 

 the supervisor’s reports relevant to these candidates 

 seating plans for each practical session, referring to each candidate by candidate number 

 the attendance register 

 2 Where the practical exam has taken place in more than one practical session, I have clearly labelled the supervisor’s results, supervisor’s reports and seating plans with the time and laboratory name/number for each practical session. 

 3 I have included details of difficulties relating to each practical session experienced by the centre or by candidates. 

 4 I have reported any other adverse circumstances affecting candidates, e.g. illness, bereavement or temporary injury, directly to Cambridge International on a special consideration form. 

Signed ...................................................................................................... (supervisor) 

Name (in block capitals) ........................................................................... 


