 This syllabus is regulated for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 20 printed pages. 

 IB19 06_0625_13/2RP © UCLES 2019 [Turn over 

# *2575934791* 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## PHYSICS 0625/13 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) May/June 2019 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. Take the weight of 1.0 kg to be 10 N (acceleration of free fall = 10 m / s 2 ). 


© UCLES 2019 0625/13/M/J/19 

**1** The diagram shows a measuring cylinder containing liquid. 

## 50 

## 40 

## 30 

## 20 

## 10 

 cm 3 

 liquid 

 measuring cylinder 

 What is the reading for the volume of liquid in the cylinder? 

 A 13.0 cm^3 B 13.5 cm^3 C 16.0 cm^3 D 17.0 cm^3 

**2** The diagram shows the speed-time graph for a car. 

 speed 

 time 

## 0 

## 0 

## Y 

## X 

 Which row describes the motion of the car at point X and at point Y? 

 point X point Y 

 A at rest moving with constant speed 

 B moving with constant speed at rest 

 C moving with changing speed at rest 

 D moving with changing speed moving with constant speed 


© UCLES 2019 0625/13/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**3** A heavy metal ball falls vertically downwards through air past four equally spaced levels J, K, L and M. 

 level J 

 level K 

 level L 

 level M 

 metal ball 

 The times taken to fall from one level to the next are measured. 

 Where is the speed of the ball greatest and which time is shortest? 

 speed is greatest between 

 time is shortest between 

 A J and K J and K 

 B J and K L and M 

 C L and M J and K 

 D L and M L and M 

**4** An object which has a mass of 600 kg is on the planet Mars. 

 The acceleration due to gravity on Mars is 4.0 m / s 2. 

 What is the weight of the object on Mars? 

 A 60 N B 150 N C 2400 N D 6000 N 

**5** Two objects are placed on a balance, one on each side: 

 Which properties of the objects can be compared using the balance? 

 A weight, mass and volume 

 B weight and mass only 

 C volume and density 

 D density only 


© UCLES 2019 0625/13/M/J/19 

**6** X, Y and Z are three regularly shaped solid objects. 

 Their dimensions and masses are shown in the diagrams. 

 200 g 

 10 cm 

 2 cm 

 5 cm 

 object X 

 200 g 

 6 cm 

 3 cm 

 4 cm 

 object Y 

 50 g 

 25 cm 

 1 cm 

 1 cm 

 object Z 

 electronic balance 

 Which objects have the same density? 

 A X, Y and Z B X and Y only C X and Z only D Y and Z only 


© UCLES 2019 0625/13/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**7** A car is driven from rest on a long straight road. The car engine exerts a constant driving force. 

 The diagram shows the horizontal forces acting on the car. The resistive forces are proportional to the speed of the car. 

 resistive forces 

 driving force (from engine) 

 Why does the car eventually reach a maximum speed? 

 A The resistive forces decrease to make the acceleration of the car negative. 

 B The resistive forces decrease to make the acceleration of the car zero. 

 C The resistive forces increase to make the acceleration of the car negative. 

 D The resistive forces increase to make the acceleration of the car zero. 


© UCLES 2019 0625/13/M/J/19 

**8** A spring is suspended from a stand. Loads are added and the extensions are measured. 

 loads 

 spring stand 

 rule 

 Which graph shows the result of plotting extension against load? 

 load 

 extension 

## A 

 load 

 extension 

## B 

 load 

 extension 

## C 

 load 

 extension 

## D 

## 0 

## 0 

## 0 

## 0 

## 0 

## 0 

## 0 

## 0 


© UCLES 2019 0625/13/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**9** A wooden bar is pivoted at its centre so that it can rotate freely. Two equal forces _F_ are applied to the bar. 

 In which diagram is the turning effect greatest? 

## F 

## F 

## A 

## F F 

## B 

## F 

## F 

## C D 

## F 

## F 

 pivot pivot 

 pivot pivot 

**10** A machine is very efficient. 

 What does this mean? 

 A It produces a large amount of power. 

 B It uses very little energy. 

 C It wastes very little energy. 

 D It works very quickly. 

**11** A body is lifted against gravity. 

 Which equation shows the work done on the body? 

 A work done = change in distance moved by the body 

 B work done = change in energy of the body 

 C work done = change in force on the body 

 D work done = change in power of the body 


© UCLES 2019 0625/13/M/J/19 

**12** The diagram shows a simple mercury barometer. 

 h 

 vacuum 

 glass tube 

 mercury 

 A change is made and the vertical height h of the column increases. 

 Which change causes this increase? 

 A A liquid with a lower density than mercury has been used. 

 B Atmospheric pressure decreases. 

 C A narrower glass tube is used. 

 D The glass tube is tilted. 

**13** The diagram shows a stone suspended on a string under the surface of a liquid. The stone experiences a pressure caused by the liquid. 

 liquid 

 string 

 stone 

 What would increase the pressure on the stone? 

 A decreasing the surface area of the stone 

 B increasing the mass of the stone 

 C lowering the stone deeper into the liquid 

 D using a liquid with a lower density 


© UCLES 2019 0625/13/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**14** Which statement is correct? 

 A A solid can flow. 

 B A solid can be compressed easily. 

 C A solid has a fixed shape. 

 D A solid takes the shape of its container. 

**15** On a hot summer day, the level of the water in a pond falls. 

 Which statement explains this? 

 A The least energetic water molecules escape from the surface and do not return. 

 B The least energetic water molecules escape from the surface and then return. 

 C The most energetic water molecules escape from the surface and do not return. 

 D The most energetic water molecules escape from the surface and then return. 

**16** Here are three statements about a liquid-in-glass thermometer with a Celsius scale. 

 1 The lower fixed point is the temperature at which pure water freezes. 

 2 The upper fixed point is the temperature at which pure water boils. 

 3 A scale is made by dividing the distance between the fixed points into equal divisions. 

 Which statements are correct? 

 A 1 and 2 only B 2 and 3 only C 1 and 3 only D 1, 2 and 3 


© UCLES 2019 0625/13/M/J/19 

**17** A night storage heater contains a large block of material that is heated electrically during the night. During the day the block cools down, releasing thermal energy into the room. 

 Which thermal capacity and which night-time temperature increase will cause the most energy to be stored by the block? 

 thermal capacity of block 

 night-time temperature increase 

 A large large 

 B large small 

 C small large 

 D small small 

**18** A student investigates the melting point of a pure substance. She heats the substance slowly and takes readings of its temperature as the substance starts to melt and when it finishes melting. 

 Which statement is correct? 

 A The temperature decreases slightly as the substance melts. 

 B The temperature fluctuates as the substance melts. 

 C The temperature increases as the substance melts. 

 D The temperature stays the same as the substance melts. 

**19** A person holds an empty glass beaker and pours hot water into it. 

 Why does it take a few seconds before his hand starts to feel hot? 

 A Glass is a poor conductor of heat. 

 B Water is a poor conductor of heat. 

 C Glass is a better conductor of heat than water. 

 D Water is a better conductor of heat than glass. 


© UCLES 2019 0625/13/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**20** The metal surface of a kettle is hot. 

 What happens to the cool air outside the kettle when it comes into contact with the hot kettle? 

 A The density of the air decreases and the air falls. 

 B The density of the air decreases and the air rises. 

 C The density of the air increases and the air falls. 

 D The density of the air increases and the air rises. 

**21** A student draws a diagram to show two different properties of a water wave. The arrows show the wave directions. 

 shallow water 

 deep water 

 Which two wave properties does the diagram show? 

 A refraction and diffraction 

 B reflection and dispersion 

 C reflection and diffraction 

 D reflection and refraction 


© UCLES 2019 0625/13/M/J/19 

**22** The diagram shows a cork with a weight attached so that the cork floats upright in water. 

## X Y 

 cork water surface 

 weight 

 Transverse waves travel across the water from X to Y. 

 In which direction do the waves make the cork move? 

 A → ← right and left 

 B ↑↓ up and down 

 C → only to the right 

 D ← only to the left 

**23** A student draws a ray diagram to show how a ray of light is reflected by a number of mirrors. 

 Which reflection has not been drawn correctly? 

 A 

## B 

## C 

## D 


© UCLES 2019 0625/13/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**24** Light passes through a glass block. 

 What is the path of the light? 

 air glass 

## A B C D 

**25** The diagram shows radiation from a lamp passing through a prism. 

 radiation from lamp 

## P 

 red light 

 screen 

 prism 

 Which type of radiation is found at P? 

 A γ-rays 

 B infrared 

 C ultraviolet 

 D X-rays 

**26** A pulse of sound is produced at the bottom of a boat. The sound travels through the water and is reflected from a shoal of fish. The sound reaches the boat again after 1.2 s. The speed of sound in the water is 1500 m / s. 

 shoal of fish 

 boat 

 How far below the bottom of the boat is the shoal of fish? 

 A 450 m B 900 m C 1800 m D 3600 m 


© UCLES 2019 0625/13/M/J/19 

**27** Which statement about ultrasound is correct? 

 A It has a higher frequency than audible sound, and it is a longitudinal wave. 

 B It has a higher frequency than audible sound, and it is a transverse wave. 

 C It has a lower frequency than audible sound, and it is a longitudinal wave. 

 D It has a lower frequency than audible sound, and it is a transverse wave. 

**28** A metal bar is placed inside a current-carrying coil, as shown in diagram 1. 

 There is a small current in the coil. The bar holds a few nails, as shown in diagram 2. 

 diagram 1 diagram 2 

 nails 

 When there is no current in the coil, the nails drop off. 

 Which row is correct? 

 metal from which the bar is made 

 effect of a larger current in the coil 

 A soft iron it makes no difference 

 B soft iron the bar holds more nails 

 C steel it makes no difference 

 D steel the bar holds more nails 


© UCLES 2019 0625/13/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**29** An iron ball on a horizontal wooden table rolls near the north pole of a bar magnet which is lying on the table. 

 Which diagram shows the most likely path of the ball, as seen from above the table? 

## S 

## N 

## A 

 magnet 

 ball 

## S 

## N 

## B 

 magnet 

## S 

## N 

## C 

 magnet 

 ball 

## S 

## N 

## D 

 magnet 

ball (^) stops here ball **30** Diagram 1 shows two thin, uncharged strips of plastic. Diagram 2 shows the same strips after they have been rubbed with a dry cloth. diagram 1 diagram 2 strips of plastic strips of plastic Which row describes the charge on the strips after rubbing, and the force between the strips after rubbing? charge on strips force between strips **A** opposite attraction **B** opposite repulsion **C** the same attraction **D** the same repulsion 


© UCLES 2019 0625/13/M/J/19 

**31** A battery stores chemical potential energy. The battery is connected to a resistor. 

 As the battery runs down, what happens to its chemical energy? 

 The energy is transferred by and ends up as 

 A electrical working internal energy in the resistor 

 B electrical working potential energy in the resistor 

 C mechanical working internal energy in the resistor 

 D mechanical working potential energy in the resistor 

**32** The diagram shows a circuit including a lamp, an electric bell and three switches S 1 , S 2 and S 3. 

 The lamp and bell are not faulty. 

## S 1 

## S 2 

## S 3 

 The bell is ringing but the lamp is not lit. 

 Which switches are closed? 

 A S 1 only 

 B S 1 and S 2 only 

 C S 1 and S 3 only 

**D** S 1 , S 2 and S (^3) 


© UCLES 2019 0625/13/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**33** A student is designing a lighting circuit for a dolls’ house. He sets up two different circuits. 

 Each circuit contains a 12 V power supply and three identical lamps. 

 Each lamp is designed to operate at normal brightness when connected individually to a 12 V supply. 

 circuit 1 circuit 2 

 12 12 

 12 V power supply 

 12 V power supply 

 Which statement is correct? 

 A In circuit 1, each of the lamps is at normal brightness. 

 B In circuit 1, if one lamp fails, the other lamps remain lit. 

 C In circuit 2, if one lamp fails, the other lamps remain lit. 

 D In circuit 2, the current from the power supply is less than in circuit 1. 

**34** A lamp is to be connected in a circuit so that the potential difference (p.d.) across it can be varied from 0 to 6 V. 

 Which circuit would be most suitable? 

## 6 V 

## A 

## 6 V 

## B 

## 6 V 

## C 

## 6 V 

## D 


© UCLES 2019 0625/13/M/J/19 

**35** A simple wiring diagram for an electric cooker is shown. 

 live neutral earth 

 connection to casing 

 electric cooker 

 metal casing 

 Why is there a wire connecting the metal case of the cooker to earth? 

 A It improves the efficiency of the cooker. 

 B It prevents the metal case from becoming too hot when the cooker is left on. 

 C It reduces the risk of an electric shock if the live wire touches the metal case. 

 D The electric cooker will not switch on without it. 


© UCLES 2019 0625/13/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**36** In an experiment, a wire is held above a compass needle as shown. 

N (^) S An electric current is switched on in the wire and the compass needle is deflected. Which row explains why this happens and then describes what happens when the current is reversed? why this happens (^) the current is reversedwhat happens when **A** there is a magnetic field inside the wire the compass needle deflects in the opposite direction **B** there is a magnetic field inside the wire there is no effect on the compass needle **C** there is a magnetic field around the wire the compass needle deflects in the opposite direction **D** there is a magnetic field around the wire there is no effect on the compass needle **37** Which device relies upon the magnetic effect of an electric current? **A** fuse **B** relay **C** thermistor **D** variable resistor **38** Which statement about the structure of an atom is correct? **A** It contains positively charged particles only. **B** It contains negatively charged particles only. **C** It contains no charged particles. **D** It contains positively charged particles and negatively charged particles. 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2019 0625/13/M/J/19 

**39** Which statement about γ-radiation is correct? 

 A It consists of very small charged particles. 

 B It is a form of electromagnetic radiation. 

 C It is less penetrating than β-radiation. 

 D It is more highly ionising than α-radiation. 

**40** A radioactive element undergoes α-decay. 

 Which statement is not correct? 

 A A different element is formed. 

 B Radiation is emitted from the nucleus. 

 C The decay is a random process. 

 D The number of particles in the nucleus stays the same. 


