 This document consists of 9 printed pages. 

© UCLES 2020 **[Turn over** 

# Cambridge IGCSE™ 

**PHYSICS 0625/42** Paper 4 Extended Theory **May/June 2020** MARK SCHEME Maximum Mark: 80 

 Published 

Students did not sit exam papers in the June 2020 series due to the Covid-19 global pandemic. 

This mark scheme is published to support teachers and students and should be read together with the question paper. It shows the requirements of the exam. The answer column of the mark scheme shows the proposed basis on which Examiners would award marks for this exam. Where appropriate, this column also provides the most likely acceptable alternative responses expected from students. Examiners usually review the mark scheme after they have seen student responses and update the mark scheme if appropriate. In the June series, Examiners were unable to consider the acceptability of alternative responses, as there were no student responses to consider. 

Mark schemes should usually be read together with the Principal Examiner Report for Teachers. However, because students did not sit exam papers, there is no Principal Examiner Report for Teachers for the June 2020 series. 

Cambridge International will not enter into discussions about these mark schemes. 

Cambridge International is publishing the mark schemes for the June 2020 series for most Cambridge IGCSE™ and Cambridge International A & AS Level components, and some Cambridge O Level components. 


## 0625/42 

Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

May/June 2020 

 © UCLES 2020 

 Page 2 of 9 

 Generic Marking Principles 

 These general marking principles must be applied by all examiners when marking candidate answers. They should be applied alongside thespecific content of the mark scheme or generic level descriptors for a question. Each question paper and mark scheme will also comply with thesemarking principles.GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 1:Marks must be awarded in line with:^ •^ 

 the specific content of the mark scheme or the generic level descriptors for the question 

-^ 

 the specific skills defined in the mark scheme or in the generic level descriptors for the question 

-^ 

 the standard of response required by a candidate as exemplified by the standardisation scripts. GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 2:Marks awarded are always 

 whole marks 

 (not half marks, or other fractions). 

 GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 3:Marks must be awarded 

 positively 

## : 

## •^ 

 marks are awarded for correct/valid answers, as defined in the mark scheme. However, credit is given for valid answers which go beyond thescope of the syllabus and mark scheme, referring to your Team Leader as appropriate 

-^ 

 marks are awarded when candidates clearly demonstrate what they know and can do 

-^ 

 marks are not deducted for errors 

-^ 

 marks are not deducted for omissions 

-^ 

 answers should only be judged on the quality of spelling, punctuation and grammar when these features are specifically assessed by thequestion as indicated by the mark scheme. The meaning, however, should be unambiguous. GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 4:Rules must be applied consistently e.g. in situations where candidates have not followed instructions or in the application of generic leveldescriptors. 


Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

May/June 2020 

 Page 3 of 9 

 GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 5:Marks should be awarded using the full range of marks defined in the mark scheme for the question (however; the use of the full mark range maybe limited according to the quality of the candidate responses seen).GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 6:Marks awarded are based solely on the requirements as defined in the mark scheme. Marks should not be awarded with grade thresholds orgrade descriptors in mind. Science-Specific Marking Principles 1 

 Examiners should consider the context and scientific use of any keywords when awarding marks. Although keywords may be present, marksshould not be awarded if the keywords are used incorrectly. The examiner should not choose between contradictory statements given in the same question part, and credit should not be awarded for anycorrect statement that is contradicted within the same question part. Wrong science that is irrelevant to the question should be ignored. Although spellings do not have to be correct, spellings of syllabus terms must allow for clear and unambiguous separation from other syllabusterms with which they may be confused (e.g. ethane 

 /^ ethene, glucagon 

 /^ glycogen, refraction 

 /^ reflection). 

 The error carried forward (ecf) principle should be applied, where appropriate. If an incorrect answer is subsequently used in a scientificallycorrect way, the candidate should be awarded these subsequent marking points. Further guidance will be included in the mark scheme wherenecessary and any exceptions to this general principle will be noted. 


Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

May/June 2020 

 Page 4 of 9 

 ‘List rule’ guidanceFor questions that require 

 n^ 

 responses (e.g. State 

 two 

 reasons …): 

## •^ 

 The response should be read as continuous prose, even when numbered answer spaces are provided 

-^ 

 Any response marked 

 ignore 

 in the mark scheme should not count towards 

 n 

## •^ 

 Incorrect responses should not be awarded credit but will still count towards 

 n 

## •^ 

 Read the entire response to check for any responses that contradict those that would otherwise be credited. Credit should 

 not 

 be 

 awarded for any responses that are contradicted within the rest of the response. Where two responses contradict one another, thisshould be treated as a single incorrect response 

-^ 

 Non-contradictory responses after the first 

 n^ 

 responses may be ignored even if they include incorrect science. 

 Calculation specific guidanceCorrect answers to calculations should be given full credit even if there is no working or incorrect working, 

 unless 

 the question states ‘show 

 your working’.For questions in which the number of significant figures required is not stated, credit should be awarded for correct answers when rounded bythe examiner to the number of significant figures given in the mark scheme. This may not apply to measured values.For answers given in standard form, (e.g. 

 a^ 

## ×^10 

 n ) in which the convention of restricting the value of the coefficient ( 

 a ) to a value between 1 

 and 10 is not followed, credit may still be awarded if the answer can be converted to the answer given in the mark scheme.Unless a separate mark is given for a unit, a missing or incorrect unit will normally mean that the final calculation mark is not awarded.Exceptions to this general principle will be noted in the mark scheme. Guidance for chemical equationsMultiples 

 /^ fractions of coefficients used in chemical equations are acceptable unless stated otherwise in the mark scheme. 

 State symbols given in an equation should be ignored unless asked for in the question or stated otherwise in the mark scheme. 


Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

May/June 2020 

 Page 5 of 9 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 1(a)(i) 

 s^ = 

 vt in any form OR (s 

## =) 

 vt OR relates distance to area (under graph) 

## C1 

 any 

 one 

 of: 5 

## ×^20 

## /^ 60 OR 40 

## ×^ 

## 20 

## /^ 60 OR 6 

## ×^22 

## /^60 

## C1 

 (s^ 

## =^ 1.667 

## +^ 13.333 

## +^ 

## 2.2 

## =) 

## 17 

 km 

## A1 

 1(a)(ii) 

 average speed 

## =^ 

 candidate’s (i) 

 /^ time 

## C1 

 (average 

 speed 

## =^ 

## 17 

## ×^60 

## /^74 

## =) 

## 14 

 km 

 /^ h 

## A1 

 1(b) 

 gradient 

## B1 

 (gradient 

## =) 

 change of speed 

 /^ time 

## B1 

 1(c) 

## 0 

## B1 

 (constant) gradient = 0 OR speed constant 

## B1 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 2(a) 

 impulse OR 

 Δp 

## =^ 

 m(v 

-^ u) in any form 

## C1 

 (impulse 

## =) 

## 750 

## 000 

## (84 

## –^ 

## 42) 

## C1 

 (impulse 

## =) 

## 3.2 

## ×^ 

## 10 

## 7 N 

 s or m kg / 

 s^ 

## A1 

 2(b) 

 Ft^ 

 =^ impulse OR 

 Δp in any form 

## OR (F 

 =) (impulse OR 

 Δp) 

 /^ t 

## C1 

## (F^ 

## =^ 3.2 

 x^10 

## 7 /^80 

## =) 

## 3.9 

## ×^10 

## 5 N 

## A1 

 2(c) 

 reduces drag 

 /^ air resistance (experienced by the train) 

 /^ more streamlined 

## B1 

 2(d) 

 less drag 

 /^ air resistance (at slower speeds) 

## B1 

 2(e) 

 (maximum) friction (force) between rails and train reduced 

 /^ train may slide 

## B1 


Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

May/June 2020 

 Page 6 of 9 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 3(a) 

## E^ = 

 mc 

 ΔT in any form OR (E 

## =) 

 mc 

## ΔT 

## C1 

 efficiency 

## =^ 

 (energy) output 

 /^ (energy) input in any form 

## C1 

## 15 

## ×^ 

## 4200 

## ×^ 

## ΔT 

## =^ 

## 5000 

## ×^ 

## 3600 

## ×^ 

## 0.2 

## C1 

## (ΔT 

## =^ 

## 5000 

## ×^3600 

## ×^ 

## 0.2 

## /^15 

## ×^ 

## 4200 

## =) 

## 57 

## °C 

## A1 

 3(b) 

 e.g. renewable OR no air pollution OR low running costs OR no named polluting gas OR no greenhouse effect 

## M1 

 explanation that follows from advantage stated 

## A1 

 e.g. expensive to install OR not available at night OR visual pollution OR needs a suitable (roof) space 

## M1 

 explanation that follows from disadvantage stated 

## A1 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 4(a) 

 (place) in melting ice 

## B1 

 when bead has stopped moving OR owtte mark as lower fixed point 

## /^0 

## °C 

## B1 

 (place) in steam (above boiling water) 

## B1 

 when bead has stopped moving OR owtte mark as upper fixed point 

## /^100 

## °C 

## B1 

 4(b) 

 bead would not be liquid owtte 

## B1 

 4(c)(i) 

 thinner bore 

 /^ tube OR smaller bulb OR use liquid which expands more (per unit change in temperature) 

## B1 

 4(c)(ii) 

 longer tube OR larger (volume) glass bulb OR use liquid which expands less (per unit change in temperature) 

## B1 

 4(d) 

 expands uniformly (with temperature) OR same distance between all degree intervals 

## B1 


Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

May/June 2020 

 Page 7 of 9 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 5(a) 

 three wavefronts parallel to each other AND same angles of reflection and incidence both by eye 

## B1 

 two wavelengths same as original wavelength by eye 

## B1 

 three reflected waves meet incident waves at barrier 

## B1 

 5(b) 

 v^ = 

 fλ 

 in any form OR (f 

## =) 

 v/λ 

## C1 

 OR (f 

## =) 

## 1.2 

## /^ 0.36 

## C1 

 (f^ =) 

## 3.3 

 Hz 

## A1 

 5(c) 

 sound OR ultrasound 

## B1 

 compressions 

## B1 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 6(a) 

 incident ray travels straight on at first face of prism 1 

## B1 

 ray reflected through 90° at sloping face of prism 1 continues vertically downwards to sloping face of prism 2 

## B1 

 ray reflected through 90° at sloping face and leaves box horizontally 

## B1 

 6(b) 

 n^ = 

## 1 / 

 sin C in any form OR (n 

## =) 

## 1 / 

 sin C 

## B1 

 {(n=) 

## 1 / 

 sin 45 OR (n=) 

## 1 

 /^ 0.707} AND (n=) 1.41 

## B1 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 7(a)(i) 

 primary coil wound round iron AND (labelled primary or coil OR connected to labelled supply 

## /^12 

## V) 

## B1 

 secondary coil wound round iron AND (labelled secondary OR connected to labelled output 

## /^2 

## V) 

## B1 

 significantly more coils around primary 

## B1 


Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

May/June 2020 

 Page 8 of 9 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 7(a)(ii) 

 two from three •^ 

 links magnetic fields of coils 

 /^ primary and secondary 

## •^ 

 stronger magnetic field in secondary 

-^ 

 better induction owtte 

## B2 

 7(a)(iii) 

## V^1 

## I^1 

## =^ V 

## I 22 

 in any form OR ( 

## I^1 

## =)^ 

## V^2 

## I/^2 

## V^1 

## OR ( 

## I^1 

## =)^ 

## 2 × 

## 0.10 

## /^12 

## C1 

## (I^1 

## =) 

## 0.017 

## A^ 

## A1 

 7(b) 

 metal case earthed 

## B1 

 in case wire falls off 

 /^ insulation fails 

 /^ live(wire) touches case 

## B1 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 8(a) 

 two circuit symbols correct 

## B1 

 three circuit symbols correct 

## B1 

 symbol for cell, battery or power supply AND two other circuit symbols in series 

## B1 

 LED correct way round 

## B1 

 8(b) 

## R^ = 

## V^ 

## /^ I^ 

 in any form OR (R 

## =) 

## V^ 

## /^ I^ 

## C1 

## (R 

## = 3.1 

## /^ 0.030 

## =) 

## 100 

## Ω^ 

## A1 

 8(c)(i) 

 uses 10.5 

## =^ 

## 2.1 

## +^ 

 V across heater 

## C1 

## (R 

## =^ 

## 8.4 

## /^ 1.5 

## =) 

## 5.6 

## Ω^ 

## A1 

 8(c)(ii) 

## P^ = 

## VI 

 in any form OR (P 

## =) 

## VI 

## C1 

## (P 

## =^ 

## 8.4 

## ×^ 

## 1.5 

## =) 

## 12.6 

## W 

## A1 


Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

May/June 2020 

 Page 9 of 9 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 9(a) 

 output 1, 1, 1, 0 

## B1 

 9(b)(i) 

## AND 

## B1 

 9(b)(ii) 

 first two lines of E 0,1 

## B1 

 last two lines of E 1,1 

## B1 

 9(c) 

## Q^ 

## =^ I 

 t in any form OR (Q 

## =) 

 It^ 

## C1 

## (Q 

## =^ 

## 3 × 

## 60) 

## =^180 

## (C) 

## C1 

 (n^ 

## =^3 

## ×^60 

## /^ 1.6 

## ×^ 

## 10 

 –19 

## )^ = 

## 1.1 

## ×^10 

 21 

## C1 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 10(a) 

 (beam) narrow OR straight OR in one direction owtte 

## B1 

 radiation in other directions absorbed 

## B1 

 10(b)(i) 

 out of page 

 /^ towards viewer 

## B1 

 equiv. to current in direction of beam 

## B1 

 10(b)(ii) 

 opposite to (i) 

## B1 

 equiv. to current in opposite direction to beam OR LH rule mentioned or described 

## B1 

 10(b)(iii) 

 none 

## B1 

 (γ) uncharged OR not equivalent to current 

## B1 


