 This document has 16 pages. Blank pages are indicated. 

IB20 06_0625_21/4RP© UCLES 2020 (^) **[Turn over** 

### *6425434103* 

# Cambridge IGCSE ™ 

#### PHYSICS 0625/21 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) May/June 2020 45 minutes You must answer on the multiple choice answer sheet. You will need: Multiple choice answer sheetSoft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) INSTRUCTIONS 

- There are **forty** questions on this paper. Answer **all** questions. 

- For each question there are four possible answersand record your choice in soft pencil on the multiple choice answer sheet. **A** , **B** , **C** and **D**. Choose the **one** you consider correct 

- Follow the instructions on the multiple choice answer sheet. 

- Write in soft pencil. 

- Write your name, centre number and candidate number on the multiple choice answer sheet in thespaces provided unless this has been done for you. 

- Do **not** use correction fluid. 

- Do **not** write on any bar codes. 

- You may use a calculator. 

- Take the weight of 1.0 kg to be 10 N (acceleration of free fall = 10 m / s 2 ). **INFORMATION** 

- The total mark for this paper is 40. 

- Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. 

- Any rough working should be done on this question paper. 


© UCLES 2020 0625/21/M/J/20 

**1** A pendulum makes 50 complete swings in 2 min 40 s. What is the time period for 1 complete swing? **A** 1.6 s **B** 3.2 s **C** 4.8 s **D** 6.4 s 

**2** A student investigates the motion of a ball rolling down a slope. The diagram shows the speed _v_ of the ball at different times _t_. _t_ = 0 s _v_ = 0 cm / s _t_ = 0.2 s 

_v_ = 2.8 cm / s (^) _t_ = 0.4 s ball _v_ = 5.1 cm / s (^) _v_ = 7.0 _t_ = 0.6 cm s / s Which statement describes the motion of the ball? **A** The acceleration is not constant. **B** The acceleration is negative. **C** The speed is decreasing. **D** The velocity is constant. **3** Which statement about acceleration is correct? **A** It is related to the changing speed of an object. **B** It is the distance an object travels in one second. **C** It is the force acting on an object divided by the distance it travels in one second. **D** It is the force acting on an object when it is near to the Earth. **4** Which statement correctly describes the effects of placing a heavy load in a car? **A** It is easier to accelerate the car and easier to bring the car to rest. **B** It is easier to accelerate the car but more difficult to bring the car to rest. **C** It is more difficult to accelerate the car and more difficult to bring the car to rest. **D** It is more difficult to accelerate the car but easier to bring the car to rest. 


© UCLES 2020 0625/21/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**5** A mass of 6.0 kg rests on the surface of a planet. On this planet, _g_ = 20 N / kg. What is the weight of the object? **A** 0.30 N **B** 0.60 N **C** 60 N **D** 120 N 

**6** The mass of a measuring cylinder is 190 g. 400 cm^3 of liquid is put into the measuring cylinder. The total mass of the measuring cylinder and the liquid is 560 g. Four solid objects are lowered in turn into the liquid. The densities of the objects are shown. 1 0.40 g / cm^3 2 0.90 g / cm^3 3 1.2 g / cm^3 4 2.7 g / cm^3 Which objects will float in the liquid? **A** 1 only **B** 1 and 2 only **C** 1, 2 and 3 **D** 3 and 4 only 

**7** The diagram shows a wooden beam PQ, of negligible weight, which is attached to a wall by ahinge at P and kept in a horizontal position by a vertical rope attached at Q. 

 The beam is 3.0 m in length. A man of weight 800 N walks along the beam from P to Q. 

#### Q 

 hinge 

 beam 

 rope 

 wall man 

#### P 

 What is the distance of the man from P when the tension in the rope at Q becomes equal to 500 N? A 0.53 m B 1.1 m C 1.9 m D 2.5 m 


© UCLES 2020 0625/21/M/J/20 

**8** Which quantity is a vector? **A** acceleration **B** distance **C** speed **D** mass 

**9** An object of mass 1.2 kg is moving with a velocity of 2.0 m / s when it is acted on by a force of 4.0 N. The velocity of the object increases to 5.0 m / s. For what period of time does the force act on the object? **A** 0.90 s **B** 1.1 s **C** 1.5 s **D** 3.6 s 

**10** The diagram shows part of a rollercoaster ride with the car at different positions. The car runs freely down from position X to position Y and up the hill on the other side. 

 X 

#### Y 

 car 

 What happens to the kinetic energy and to the gravitational potential energy of the car as itmoves from position X to position Y? 

kinetic energy (^) potential energygravitational **A** decreases decreases **B** decreases increases **C** increases decreases **D** increases increases 


© UCLES 2020 0625/21/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**11** Which energy resource does **not** have the Sun as the original source? **A** coal **B** geothermal **C** hydroelectric **D** wind 

**12** The diagram shows a solid block resting on a bench. The dimensions of the block are shown. 

 80 cm^ bench 

 20 cm 

 40 cm 

#### P R 

#### Q 

 On which labelled surface should the block rest to produce the smallest pressure on the bench? A P B Q C R D P, Q and R produce the same pressure 

**13** The pressure due to the liquid on an object immersed in that liquid is 4500 Pa. The density of the liquid is 900 kg / m^3. What is the depth of the object below the surface of the liquid? **A** 0.5 cm **B** 2.0 cm **C** 50 cm **D** 200 cm 

**14** A gas is heated in a sealed container. The volume of the container does not change. What happens to the molecules of the gas? **A** The average distance between molecules increases. **B** The average kinetic energy of the molecules increases. **C** The mass of each molecule increases. **D** The volume of each molecule increases. 


© UCLES 2020 0625/21/M/J/20 

**15** Water in a beaker evaporates when left on a bench for a period of time. Which three factors all affect the rate of evaporation of the water? **A** wind speed, surface area, temperature **B** wind speed, temperature, volume **C** wind speed, surface area, volume **D** surface area, temperature, volume 

**16** A solid is heated causing it to expand. What effect does this have on its mass and on its density? mass density **A** decreases decreases **B** decreases stays constant **C** stays constant decreases **D** stays constant stays constant 

**17** The diagrams show four blocks of steel. The blocks are all drawn to the same scale. The same quantity of thermal energy is given to each block. Which block shows the greatest rise in temperature? **A B C D** 

**18** Why are metals better thermal conductors than other solids? **A** Metals contain free electrons which help transfer the energy. **B** Molecules in metals are in fixed positions. **C** Molecules in metals can move freely. **D** Molecules in metals vibrate faster than those in other solids. 


© UCLES 2020 0625/21/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**19** Two freezers X and Y are identical except that one has a door opening at the front and the otherhas a door opening at the top. 

#### X 

 freezer 

 door 

 Y 

 freezer 

 door 

 Both doors are the same size and are opened for the same amount of time. Which freezer gains the least amount of thermal energy in this time and why? 

 least thermal energyfreezer gaining the reason A X cold air falls B X warm air falls C Y cold air falls D Y warm air falls 

**20** A wave of frequency 6600 Hz travels 1320 m in 4.0 s. What is the wavelength? **A** 0.050 m **B** 0.80 m **C** 1.3 m **D** 20 m 


© UCLES 2020 0625/21/M/J/20 

**21** The diagram shows a wave. 8 cm 

 4 cm 

 3 cm 6 cm 

 What are the amplitude and the wavelength of this wave? amplitude / cm wavelength / cm A 3 4 B 3 8 C 6 4 D 6 8 

**22** Which statement is correct? **A** The speed of light in glass is equal to the speed of light in a vacuum multiplied by the refractive index of glass. **B** The incident angle of a light ray at an air-glass surface is the angle between the ray and the glass surface. 

**C** The sine of the critical angle at an air-glass surface is equal to (^) refractiveindex^1 ofglass. **D** The angle of refraction for light passing through an air-glass surface is proportional to theangle of incidence at that surface. 


© UCLES 2020 0625/21/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**23** A narrow beam of white light passes through a prism and is dispersed into a spectrum. 

(^12) 3 white light Which row is correct? colour 1 colour 2 colour 3 **A** blue yellow red **B** red blue yellow **C** red yellow blue **D** yellow blue red **24** An intruder alarm sensor detects that a person is warmer than his surroundings. Which type of electromagnetic wave does the sensor detect? **A** infrared **B** radio **C** ultraviolet **D** visible light **25** Sound travels through air as a series of compressions and rarefactions. Which statement correctly compares a compression with a rarefaction? **A** In a compression the wavelength is longer than in a rarefaction. **B** In a compression the wavelength is shorter than in a rarefaction. **C** In a compression the density of the air is greater than in a rarefaction. **D** In a compression the density of the air is lower than in a rarefaction. 


© UCLES 2020 0625/21/M/J/20 

**26** Four nails **A** , **B** , **C** and **D** are tested to find which makes the strongest permanent magnet. One of the nails is placed against a bar magnet and the number of paper clips which the nail can support is recorded. 

 N S 

 nail 

 bar magnet 

 paper clips 

 The bar magnet is then removed and the number of paper clips remaining attached to the nail is recorded. Each nail is tested individually. Which nail becomes the strongest permanent magnet? number of paper clips attached to the nail bar magnet present bar magnet removed A 2 0 B 2 1 C 4 3 D 5 2 

**27** The circuit shows one method of magnetising a steel bar. + – 

 steel bar How can the circuit be altered so that it can be used to demagnetise the magnetised steel bar? A remove the steel bar from the coil whilst the current is switched on B replace the d.c. supply with an a.c. supply and gradually reduce the supply voltage to zero C reverse the polarity of the d.c. supply D reverse the polarity of the d.c. supply and gradually reduce the supply voltage to zero 


© UCLES 2020 0625/21/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**28** A student uses the circuit shown to determine the resistance of two identical resistors. 

#### A 

#### V 

 The voltmeter reading is 2.2 V and the ammeter reading is 0.25 A. What is the resistance of each resistor? A 0.275 Ω B 0.55 Ω C 4.4 Ω D 8.8 Ω 

**29** An electric fire is connected to a 240 V supply and transfers energy at a rate of 1.0 kW. How much charge passes through the fire in 1.0 h? **A** 42 C **B** 250 C **C** 1.5 × 10 4 C **D** 2.4 × 10 5 C 

**30** The diagram shows an incomplete circuit. The temperature and light levels around the circuit remain unchanged. 

#### A P^ Q 

 Four electrical components are connected in turn across PQ. The cell is reversed and the fourelectrical components are connected again in turn across PQ. 

 For which component is there a significant change in the magnitude of the current? A diode B light-dependent resistor C resistor D thermistor 


© UCLES 2020 0625/21/M/J/20 

**31** In the circuit shown, A 1 and A 2 are ammeters. 

A (^1) S A (^2) Switch S is closed. Which row is correct? the resistance ofthe whole circuit reading of A 1 reading of A (^2) **A** decreases stays the same increases **B** decreases increases increases **C** increases stays the same stays the same **D** increases decreases decreases **32** Which symbol represents an OR gate? **A B C D** 


© UCLES 2020 0625/21/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**33** A digital circuit consists of two logic gates. When the input to the circuit is 1 and 1, the output is 0. digital circuit 

#### 1 

#### 0 

#### 1 

 input output 

 Which combination of logic gates gives this result? A B 

#### C D 

**34** The diagram shows a wire between the poles of a magnet. The wire is perpendicular to the page. 

## N 

## S 

 LEFT wire RIGHT 

 The wire is moved and a current is induced upwards, out of the paper. In which direction is the wire moved? A left to right B right to left C up the page D down the page 


© UCLES 2020 0625/21/M/J/20 

**35** A 100% efficient transformer converts a 240power of the transformer can be a maximum of 20 V input voltage to a 12 W. V output voltage. The output 

 The output is connected to two 0.30 A bulbs in parallel. One of the bulbs fails. How does the current in the primary coil change? A It decreases by 0.30 A. B It decreases by 0.015 A. C It increases by 0.15 A. D It remains unchanged. 

**36** Cables transmit electrical power from the output of the transformer at a power station to the input of the transformer at a substation. 

 transformer at power station 

 transformer at substation 

 cables output input 

 The power at the output of the transformer at the power station is 400 MW. Which situation delivers the most power to the input of the transformer at the substation? potential difference at power station transformeroutput / kV diameter of cables A 200 large B 200 small C 400 large D 400 small 


© UCLES 2020 0625/21/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**37** Uranium-235 is a radioactive isotope. It undergoes a chain of decays and eventually forms thestable isotope lead-207. These two isotopes are represented as shown. 

(^23592) U (^20782) Pb During this chain of decay, how many protons and how many neutrons are lost from a single nucleus of uranium-235 to form a single nucleus of lead-207? protons neutrons **A** 10 18 **B** 10 28 **C** 18 10 **D** 28 10 **38** A radioactive material has a half-life of 20 days. A sample of the material contains 8.0 × 10 10 atoms. How many atomic nuclei have decayed after 60 days? **A** 1.0 × 10 10 **B** 4.0 × 10 10 **C** 6.0 × 10 10 **D** 7.0 × 10 10 **39** A thin sheet of paper is placed between a radioactive source and a radiation detector. The countrate falls to a very low reading. source paper detector counter From this result, which type of radiation is the source emitting? **A** α-particles **B** β-particles **C** γ-rays **D** X-rays 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeAssessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University ofCambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2020 0625/21/M/J/20 

**40** α-particles, β-particles and γ-rays are emitted by radioactive nuclei when they decay. Which emissions can be deflected by an electric field? **A** α-particles and β-particles only **B** β-particles and γ-rays only **C** γ-rays and α-particles only **D** α-particles, β-particles and γ-rays 


