 This document has 16 pages. Blank pages are indicated. 

IB20 06_0610_22/4RP© UCLES 2020 (^) **[Turn over** 

## *0830024321* 

# Cambridge IGCSE ™ 

### BIOLOGY 0610/22 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) May/June 2020 45 minutes You must answer on the multiple choice answer sheet. You will need: Multiple choice answer sheetSoft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) INSTRUCTIONS 

- There are **forty** questions on this paper. Answer **all** questions. 

- For each question there are four possible answersand record your choice in soft pencil on the multiple choice answer sheet. **A** , **B** , **C** and **D**. Choose the **one** you consider correct 

- Follow the instructions on the multiple choice answer sheet. 

- Write in soft pencil. 

- Write your name, centre number and candidate number on the multiple choice answer sheet in thespaces provided unless this has been done for you. 

- Do **not** use correction fluid. 

- Do **not** write on any bar codes. 

- You may use a calculator. **INFORMATION** 

- The total mark for this paper is 40. 

- Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. 

- Any rough working should be done on this question paper. 


© UCLES 2020 0610/22/M/J/20 

**1** The diagram shows what happened in an experiment with plant seedlings. start 

 light 

 next day 

 light 

 Which characteristic of living things made the seedlings grow towards the light? A excretion B nutrition C respiration D sensitivity 

**2** A rat has the scientific name _Rattus rattus_. What do the two parts of this name refer to? **A** genus and species **B** kingdom and genus **C** kingdom and species **D** variety and genus 

**3** The diagram shows a plant cell. A biologist wants to find out the number of chromosomes it contains. Which labelled part should be examined more closely? 

### A 

### B 

### C 

### D 


© UCLES 2020 0610/22/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**4** The diagram shows a human liver cell. M 

 The length of structure M on the diagram is 6 mm. The magnification of the diagram is x 2000. What is the actual length of M? A 0.03 μm B 3 μm C 333 μm D 12 000 mm 

**5** Which diagram shows the appearance of a plant cell several minutes after it has been placed in aconcentrated solution of sugar? 

 A B 

### C D 


© UCLES 2020 0610/22/M/J/20 

**6** An uncooked piece of potato was placed in a solution. After two hours the size of the piece ofpotato had decreased. 

 Which row explains why this has happened and how the potato cells have changed? 

water potential (^) potato cells potato cells external solution become **A** higher lower flaccid **B** higher lower turgid **C** lower higher flaccid **D** lower higher turgid **7** The diagram shows a section of DNA, with four bases identified on one strand. G A C T Which sequence of bases would be on the other strand, starting from the top? **A** AGTC **B** CTGA **C** GACT **D** TCAG **8** Which food-testing solution shows a positive result when it turns from blue to purple? **A** Benedict’s solution **B** biuret solution **C** ethanol **D** iodine solution 


© UCLES 2020 0610/22/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**9** The diagram shows the four types of human tooth. 1 2 3 4 

 incisor canine premolar molar Which teeth are used for grinding food? A 1 and 2 B 2 and 3 C 3 and 4 D 4 and 1 

**10** Enzymes function best at their optimum temperature. Which statement describes the effect on an enzyme of increasing the temperature to the enzyme’s optimum temperature? **A** There are more frequent successful collisions. **B** The kinetic energy of the enzymes decreases. **C** The enzymes begin to lose their complementary shape. **D** The rate at which enzyme-substrate complexes form is reduced. 


© UCLES 2020 0610/22/M/J/20 

**11** The diagram shows how the rate of photosynthesis varies with light intensity. The four curves show different conditions of temperature and carbon dioxide concentration. 

 rate of photosynthesis 

 light intensity 

30 °C, 0.2% CO (^2) 20 °C, 0.2% CO (^2) 30 °C, 0.1% CO (^2) P 20 °C, 0.1% CO (^2) What limits the rate of photosynthesis at point P? light intensity carbon dioxideconcentration temperature **A**    key **B**    = yes **C**    = no **D**    **12** The diagram shows a plant cell. In which part of the cell does photosynthesis occur? **A B C D** 


© UCLES 2020 0610/22/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**13** The graph shows the effect of pH on the activity of an enzyme. 

 enzyme activity 

### 1 3 5 7 

 pH 

### 9 11 

 In which part of the alimentary canal would this enzyme be most active? A large intestine B mouth C small intestine D stomach 

**14** The diagram shows the structure of a villus. The arteriole, capillary, lacteal and venule are labelled with letters. Which letter shows where nutrients are absorbed into the blood? 

### A 

### D 

### B 

### C 

 direction of blood flow 


© UCLES 2020 0610/22/M/J/20 

**15** Which change increases the rate of water uptake by the roots of a plant? **A** decrease in evaporation of water from mesophyll cells **B** decrease in length of root hairs **C** decrease in water potential of root hair cells **D** decrease in water potential of soil water 

**16** Dodder is a plant that grows on other plants called the hosts. The dodder plant connects to the host’s vascular bundles. The dodder plant does not have green leaves or roots. What correctly describes the regions for translocation? host leaves dodder **A** sink sink **B** sink source **C** source sink **D** source source 

**17** The diagrams show the single circulation of a fish and the double circulation of a mammal. gill capillaries 

 body capillaries fish circulation 

 lung capillaries 

 body capillaries mammal circulation 

 ventricle 

 ventricles 

 atrium 

### R 

### T 

### S 

### Y 

### X 

### Z 

 atria 

 Which letters represent areas of oxygenated blood? A R and X B S and Y C T and Y D T and Z 


© UCLES 2020 0610/22/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**18** The diagram shows the human heart and main blood vessels. 

 lungs 

 rest of body 

### X 

 What is the blood vessel labelled X? A aorta B pulmonary artery C pulmonary vein D vena cava 

**19** The following are statements about immunity. 1 The transfer of antibodies from mother to baby in breast milk is an example of passive immunity. 2 Passivememory cells. immunity results in long term immunity because of the production of 3 Active immunity is gained after vaccination with antigens. Which statements are correct? **A** 1, 2 and 3 **B** 1 and 2 only **C** 1 and 3 only **D** 2 and 3 only 


© UCLES 2020 0610/22/M/J/20 

**20** What is the site of gas exchange in humans? **A** nose **B** alveoli **C** bronchus **D** trachea 

**21** The substances listed are associated with aerobic respiration. 1 carbon dioxide 2 glucose 3 oxygen 4 water Which substances are the products of aerobic respiration? **A** 1 and 3 **B** 1 and 4 **C** 2 and 3 **D** 3 and 4 

**22** The formula C 2 H 5 OH represents a chemical produced during anaerobic respiration. What is this chemical? **A** alcohol **B** glucose **C** glycogen **D** lactic acid 

**23** What is filtered out of the blood in the glomerulus into the kidney tubule? 

 glucose urea A   key B   = yes C   = no D   


© UCLES 2020 0610/22/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**24** Which responses occur in the iris of the eye when a person walks from a brightly lit area to adimly lit area? 

 circular muscle radial muscle A contract contract B contract relax C relax contract D relax relax 

**25** Which glands are endocrine glands? **A** adrenal, pancreas, testes **B** adrenal, ovaries, salivary **C** ovaries, sweat, testes **D** pancreas, salivary, sweat 

**26** What are the effects of insulin and adrenaline on the concentration of blood glucose? 

 effect of insulin on blood glucose concentration 

 effect of adrenaline on blood glucose concentration A decreases decreases B decreases increases C increases decreases D increases increases 

**27** Asexual reproduction can be used to produce crops. Why might a disease be likely to spread throughout the whole crop? **A** crop plants are genetically different **B** crop plants are genetically identical **C** many offspring are produced **D** offspring are produced quickly 


© UCLES 2020 0610/22/M/J/20 

**28** In a comparison between the processes of artificial insemination (AI) and in vitro fertilisation(IVF), which statement applies to IVF only? 

 A Human egg cells are harvested from the ovary. B Donated sperm cells are used to fertilise the egg cells. C Childless couples are given the opportunity to have a child of their own. D Fertilisation occurs inside the body of the female. 

**29** The diagram shows half a flower. There is a description of each numbered part. 

### 1 

### 2 

### 3 

 1 the stigma which receives pollen from insects 2 the anther which produces smooth and light pollen grains 3 the ovule where fertilisation occurs when the male and female nuclei fuse Which descriptions are correct for an insect-pollinated flower? A 1 only B 1 and 3 only C 2 and 3 only D 1, 2 and 3 

**30** What is a diploid nucleus? **A** a nucleus containing one set of chromosomes **B** a nucleus containing two sets of chromosomes **C** a nucleus with one double helix of DNA **D** a nucleus with two genes 


© UCLES 2020 0610/22/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**31** Which statement about meiosis is correct? **A** At the end of meiosis a zygote has been produced. **B** During meiosis the haploid number is halved in the daughter cells. **C** Meiosis is reduction division in which diploid daughter cells are produced. **D** The parent cell contains twice as many chromosomes as each daughter cell. 

**32** The diagram shows the inheritance of height in pea plants. tall parent plant TT 

 tall offspring plant Tt 

 tall offspring plant Tt 

 dwarf parent plant tt 

 Which plants have a heterozygous genotype? A both parent plants B dwarf parent plant only C both offspring plants D tall parent plant only 

**33** The graph shows the masses of two different types of tomato. 

### 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240 

 number of tomatoes 

 mass / g 

 type 1 type 2 

 What can be concluded from the graph? A Genes do not affect the mass of tomatoes. B Type 1 tomatoes show continuous variation. C Type 2 tomatoes are sometimes smaller than type 1 tomatoes. D Type 2 tomatoes show discontinuous variation. 


© UCLES 2020 0610/22/M/J/20 

**34** Which adaptation may be present in a xerophyte? **A** leaves with small surface area and large numbers of stomata **B** little or no xylem tissue and leaves with large surface area **C** stomatal hairs and rolled leaves **D** thin or no cuticle and deep roots 

**35** The diagram shows a food chain in a rock pool. seaweed → whelks → crabs → seagulls What will happen if the number of secondary consumers increases? There will be **A** fewer crabs. **B** fewer seagulls. **C** fewer whelks. **D** less seaweed. 

**36** What is defined as ‘all of the populations of different species in an ecosystem’? **A** community **B** environment **C** habitat **D** trophic level 

**37** What is the role of anaerobic respiration in bread-making? **A** to produce alcohol to flavour the bread **B** to produce gas to make the bread rise **C** to release enough energy to bake the bread **D** to release enough lactic acid to kill the yeast 

**38** A crop plant has been genetically modified to make it resistant to herbicides. Which is a possible disadvantage of introducing this new crop plant? **A** Loss of weeds reduces competition. **B** Some weeds might become resistant to the herbicide. **C** The crop plant is unharmed and produces a higher yield. **D** The new gene will appear in new generations of the crop. 


© UCLES 2020 0610/22/M/J/20 

**39** Which is a reason for using bacteria in biotechnology? **A** Bacteria are found inside the human body. **B** Bacteria do not become resistant to antibiotics. **C** Bacteria can make complex molecules. **D** Bacteria reproduce slowly. 

**40** When a river is polluted by fertiliser, the following processes may occur. 1 increased aerobic respiration of decomposers 2 increased growth of producers 3 decreased oxygen concentration in the water What is the correct sequence for these processes? **A** 1 → 2 → 3 **B** 1 → 3 → 2 **C** 2 → 1 → 3 **D** 2 → 3 → 1 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeAssessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University ofCambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2020 0610/22/M/J/20 

### BLANK PAGE 


