 This document consists of 16 printed pages. 

 DC (JM/TP) 165274/2 © UCLES 2019 [Turn over 

* 0 7 7 3 9 7 3 0 9 1 * 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/12 Paper 1 May/June 2019 2 hours Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all the questions. Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 


© UCLES 2019 0606/12/M/J/19 

## Mathematical Formulae 

## 1. ALGEBRA 

## Quadratic Equation 

## For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

 x 

 b b ac a 

### = 

### − 2 − 4 

### 2 

## Binomial Theorem 

( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( 

## n 

# 1 ) a 

_n_ –1 (^) _b_ + 

# ( 

## n 

# 2 ) a 

_n_ –2 (^) _b_ (^2) + … + 

# ( 

## n 

# r ) a 

_n_ – _r_ (^) _br_ (^) + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( 

## n 

# r ) =^ 

## n! 

## ( n – r )! r! 

## 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

## Identities 

## sin^2 A + cos^2 A = 1 

## sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A 

## cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

## Formulae for ∆ ABC 

## a 

## sin A =^ 

## b 

## sin B =^ 

## c 

## sin C 

## a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

## ∆ = 

## 1 

## 2 bc^ sin^ A 


© UCLES 2019 0606/12/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**1 (a)** On the Venn diagrams below, shade the region indicated. 

_A_ (^) _A_ 

### C 

_B_ (^) _B_ 

### C 

###   

## A l + B l + C l A , ( B + C ) 

### [2] 

 (b)  ={ x : 0 ° G x G 360 °} 

 P = { x : cos 2 x =0 5. } 

 Q = { x : sin x =0 5. } 

 Find P + Q. [3] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/12/M/J/19 

**2 Do not use a calculator in this question.** 

 Find the coordinates of the points of intersection of the curve y = ( 2 x + 3 ) ( 2 x 1 ) and the line y = 3 2 ( x + 3 ). [5] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/12/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**3** The number, _B_ , of a certain type of bacteria at time _t_ days can be described by _B_ = 200 e 2 _t_^^ + 800 e-^2 _t_. 

 (i) Find the value of B when t = 0. [1] 

 (ii) At the instant when d d^ Bt^ = 1200 , show that e 4 t^^ 3 e^2 t 4 = 0. [3] 

 (iii) Using the substitution u = e 2 t , or otherwise, solve e 4 t^^ 3 e^2 t 4 = 0. [2] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/12/M/J/19 

**4 (a)** Given that _q pr_ 

 pr qr 2 2 1 

 2 2 

 3 

- 

### ` 

### ` 

 j 

 j 

 can be written in the form paqbr c , find the value of each of the constants a , 

 b and c. [3] 

 (b) Solve , . 

 x y x y 

### 3 4 

### 4 3 14 

 2 

 1 2 

 1 

 21 21 

### = 

### + = 

- 

(^) [3] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/12/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

### 5 

 9.6 cm 

 12 cm 

### A 

### O C B 

 i rad 

 The diagram shows the right-angled triangle OAB. The point C lies on the line OB. Angle OAB = r 2 radians and angle AOB = i radians. AC is an arc of the circle, centre O , radius 12 cm and AC has length 9.6 cm. 

 (i) Find the value of i. [2] 

 (ii) Find the area of the shaded region. [4] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/12/M/J/19 

**6 (a)** Eight books are to be arranged on a shelf. There are 4 mathematics books, 3 geography books and 1 French book. 

 (i) Find the number of different arrangements of the books if there are no restrictions. [1] 

 (ii) Find the number of different arrangements if the mathematics books have to be kept together. [3] 

 (iii) Find the number of different arrangements if the mathematics books have to be kept together and the geography books have to be kept together. [3] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/12/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

 (b) A team of 6 players is to be chosen from 8 men and 4 women. Find the number of different ways this can be done if 

 (i) there are no restrictions, [1] 

 (ii) there is at least one woman in the team. [2] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/12/M/J/19 

**7** A pilot wishes to fly his plane from a point _A_ to a point _B_ on a bearing of 055°. There is a wind blowing at 120 km h–1^ from the west. The plane can fly at 650 km h–1^ in still air. 

 (i) Find the direction in which the pilot must fly his plane in order to reach B. [4] 

 (ii) Given that the distance between A and B is 1250 km, find the time it will take the pilot to fly from A to B. [4] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/12/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

8 When e _y_^ is plotted against (^) _x_^1 , a straight line graph passing through the points (2, 20) and (4, 8) is obtained. **(i)** Find _y_ in terms of _x_. [5] **(ii)** Hence find the positive values of _x_ for which _y_ is defined. [1] **(iii)** Find the exact value of _y_ when _x_ = 3. [1] **(iv)** Find the exact value of _x_ when _y_ = 2. [2] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/12/M/J/19 

### 9 

 y 

 O x 

### P Q 

 y = 5 

 y = 4 + 2 cos 3 x 

 The diagram shows the curve y = 4 + 2 cos 3 x intersecting the line y = 5 at the points P and Q. 

 (i) Find, in terms of r, the x -coordinate of P and of Q. [3] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/12/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

 (ii) Find the exact area of the shaded region. You must show all your working. [6] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/12/M/J/19 

### 10 

 x cm 

 h cm 4 x cm 

 The diagram shows an open container in the shape of a cuboid of width x cm, length 4 x cm and height h cm. The volume of the container is 800 cm^3. 

**(i)** Show that the external surface area, _S_ cm^2 , of the open container is such that _S_ = 4 _x_^2 + (^2000) _x_. [4] 


© UCLES 2019 0606/12/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

 (ii) Given that x can vary, find the stationary value of S and determine its nature. [5] 

 Question 11 is printed on the next page. 


 © UCLES 2019 0606/12/M/J/19 

**11** The normal to the curve _y x_ 2 3 _x_ 1 3 

 2 = ^ j^ + j^ at the point where x = 37 , meets the y -axis at the point P. Find the exact coordinates of the point P. [7] 

 Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at http://www.cambridgeinternational.org after the live examination series. Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. 


