 This syllabus is regulated for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. 

 IB19 06_0620_23/4RP © UCLES 2019 [Turn over 

## *2518966734* 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

### CHEMISTRY 0620/23 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) May/June 2019 

 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/23/M/J/19 

**1** Hydrogen chloride gas ( _M_ r = 36.5) is released at P in the apparatus shown. 

 The Universal Indicator paper turns red after 38 s. 

### P 

 Universal Indicator paper 

 The experiment is repeated using sulfur dioxide ( M r = 64). 

 What is the result for sulfur dioxide? 

 Universal Indicator turns 

 time for Universal Indicator to change colour / s 

 A blue 26 

 B blue 51 

 C red 26 

 D red 51 

**2** Which piece of apparatus is used to measure 24.8 cm^3 of gas produced during a reaction? 

 A beaker 

 B conical flask 

 C measuring cylinder 

 D pipette 

**3** _R_ f values are used to identify unknown substances using paper chromatography. 

 Which statements about R f values are correct? 

 1 R f values are always less than 1.0. 

# 2 R f value = distance travelled by solvent ÷ distance travelled by unknown substance. 

 3 The higher the R f value, the further the unknown substance travels. 

 4 R f values are not affected by the solubility of the unknown substance. 

 A 1 and 2 B 1 and 3 C 2 and 3 D 3 and 4 


© UCLES 2019 0620/23/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**4** The structure of an atom is shown. 

 7p 8n 

 key = electron n= neutron p= proton 

 Which element is the atom an isotope of? 

 A nitrogen 

 B oxygen 

 C phosphorus 

 D titanium 

**5** Which row describes the formation of single covalent bonds in methane? 

 A atoms share a pair of electrons both atoms gain a noble gas electronic structure 

 B atoms share a pair of electrons both atoms have the same number of electrons in their outer shell 

 C electrons are transferred from one atom to another 

 both atoms gain a noble gas electronic structure 

 D electrons are transferred from one atom to another 

 both atoms have the same number of electrons in their outer shell 

**6** Which statement describes the structure of an ionic compound? 

 A It is a giant lattice of oppositely charged ions. 

 B It is a giant lattice of positive ions in a ‘sea’ of electrons. 

 C It is a giant molecule of oppositely charged ions. 

 D It is a simple molecule of oppositely charged ions. 

**7** When propane burns in air, carbon dioxide and water are formed. 

 What is the chemical equation for this reaction? 

 A C 3 H 8 + 2O 2 → CO 2 + 2H 2 O 

 B C 3 H 8 + 3O 2 → 3CO 2 + H 2 O 

 C C 3 H 8 + 4O 2 → 3CO 2 + 4H 2 O 

 D C 3 H 8 + 5O 2 → 3CO 2 + 4H 2 O 


© UCLES 2019 0620/23/M/J/19 

**8** What is the concentration of a solution that contains 25.0 g NaOH in 500 cm^3 of water? 

 A 0.125 mol / dm^3 

 B 0.800 mol / dm^3 

 C 1.25 mol / dm^3 

 D 3.20 mol / dm^3 

## 9 An aqueous solution of copper(II) sulfate was electrolysed using copper electrodes. 

 copper anode 

 copper cathode 

 aqueous 

## copper(II) sulfate 

 power supply 

### – + 

 Which equation for the reaction at the anode is correct? 

 A Cu → Cu 2+^ + 2e – 

 B Cu + 2e –^ → Cu 2+ 

 C Cu 2+^ → Cu + 2e – 

 D Cu 2+^ + 2e –^ → Cu 

**10** In the manufacture of aluminium by electrolysis, aluminium oxide is dissolved in molten cryolite. 

 Why is cryolite used? 

 A It lowers the melting point of the aluminium. 

 B It makes the aluminium a better conductor. 

 C It removes impurities from the aluminium. 

 D The mixture has a lower melting point than pure aluminium oxide. 

**11** Which statement about a fuel cell in a car is correct? 

 A The fuel cell produces heat, which powers the car. 

 B The fuel cell is supplied with hydrogen directly from the air. 

 C The only emission from a fuel cell is nitrogen gas, which is non-polluting. 

 D The fuel cell produces electricity, which powers an electric motor. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/23/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**12** Methane burns in oxygen to form carbon dioxide and water. 

 CH 4 (g) + 2O 2 (g) → CO 2 (g) + 2H 2 O(l) 

 The bond energies are shown in the table. 

 bond bond energy in kJ / mol 

 C–H 410 

 C–O 360 

 C=O 805 

 O–H 460 

 O–O 146 

 O=O 496 

 What is the energy change for this reaction? 

 A –818 kJ / mol B –102 kJ / mol C +102 kJ / mol D +818 kJ / mol 

**13** Which change in reaction conditions increases both the collision rate and the proportion of molecules with sufficient energy to react? 

 A addition of a catalyst 

 B increasing the concentration of a reactant 

 C increasing the surface area of a reactant 

 D increasing the temperature of the reaction 

## 14 When blue-green crystals of nickel(II) sulfate are heated, water is produced and a yellow solid 

 remains. When water is added to the yellow solid, the blue-green colour returns. 

 Which process describes these changes? 

 A combustion 

 B corrosion 

 C neutralisation 

 D reversible reaction 


© UCLES 2019 0620/23/M/J/19 

**15** A reaction between nitrogen and oxygen is shown. The forward reaction is endothermic. 

 N 2 (g) + O 2 (g) 2NO(g) 

 Which change increases the equilibrium yield of nitrogen monoxide, NO? 

 A decreasing the pressure 

 B decreasing the temperature 

 C increasing the pressure 

 D increasing the temperature 

**16** Which changes represent reduction? 

1 C _l_ (^) 2 + 2e –^ → 2C _l_ – 

## 2 Mn(VII) → Mn(II) 

## 3 sulfate(IV) → sulfate(VI) 

 A 1 and 2 B 1 and 3 C 1 only D 2 only 

**17** Which statement about carbon monoxide and aluminium oxide is correct? 

 A Carbon monoxide and aluminium oxide are both amphoteric. 

 B Carbon monoxide and aluminium oxide are both neutral. 

 C Carbon monoxide is amphoteric but aluminium oxide is neutral. 

 D Carbon monoxide is neutral but aluminium oxide is amphoteric. 

**18** The positions of elements W, X, Y and Z in the Periodic Table are shown. 

### W 

### X 

### Y 

### Z 

 Which elements form basic oxides? 

 A W, X and Y B W and X only C Y only D Z only 


© UCLES 2019 0620/23/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**19** Solutions of acid R and acid S have the same concentration. 

 The same volume of each acid at the same temperature is reacted with the same mass of magnesium ribbon. 

 The volume of hydrogen produced is measured. 

 The results are shown. 

### 0 

### 0 

 volume of hydrogen 

 time 

### R 

### S 

 Which statement about the reactions is correct? 

 A Acid S reacts faster than acid R. 

 B The final volume of hydrogen produced in each reaction is different. 

 C Acid R is a stronger acid than acid S. 

 D Acid S is a stronger acid than acid R. 

**20** Part of the Periodic Table is shown. 

### X Y Z 

### W 

 Which row describes W, X, Y and Z? 

 metal non-metal 

 A X W, Y and Z 

 B X and Y W and Z 

 C W and Z X and Y 

 D W, Y and Z X 


© UCLES 2019 0620/23/M/J/19 

**21** Which statement about the properties of elements in Group I and in Group VII is correct? 

 A Bromine displaces iodine from an aqueous solution of potassium iodide. 

 B Chlorine, bromine and iodine are diatomic gases at room temperature. 

 C Lithium, sodium and potassium are soft non-metals. 

 D Lithium, sodium and potassium have an increasing number of electrons in their outer shells. 

**22** Gas G has 10 electrons. Gas H has eight more electrons than gas G. Both gases are monoatomic. 

 Which statement about G and H is correct? 

 A Both gases are in the same group of the Periodic Table. 

 B Both gases are in the same period of the Periodic Table. 

 C Both gases are very reactive. 

 D Gas G has a higher atomic mass than gas H. 

**23** The diagrams show the structure of two substances used to make electrical conductors. 

 X Y 

 Which statement correctly describes X and Y? 

 A X is a pure metal and Y is a compound. 

 B X is a pure metal and Y is an alloy. 

 C X is a solid and Y is a liquid. 

 D X is harder and stronger than Y. 

**24** Magnesium nitrate, magnesium hydroxide and magnesium carbonate all decompose when heated. 

 Which statement about these decomposition reactions is correct? 

 A Magnesium carbonate decomposes to release carbon dioxide and oxygen. 

 B Magnesium hydroxide decomposes to release hydrogen and oxygen. 

 C Magnesium hydroxide decomposes to release water vapour. 

 D Magnesium nitrate decomposes to release oxygen only. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/23/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**25** Zinc is extracted from its ore, zinc blende, using two chemical reactions. 

 1 2ZnS + 3O 2 → 2ZnO + 2SO 2 

 2 2ZnO + C → 2Zn + CO 2 

 Which substance is reduced in reactions 1 and 2? 

 reaction 1 reaction 2 

 A O 2 C 

 B O 2 ZnO 

 C ZnS C 

 D ZnS ZnO 

**26** Four metals, zinc, M, copper and magnesium, are reacted with aqueous solutions of their nitrates. 

 The results are shown. 

 metal 

 magnesium nitrate 

### M 

 nitrate 

 copper nitrate 

 zinc nitrate 

 magnesium    key 

 zinc    = reacts 

 M    = no reaction 

 copper    

 What is the order of reactivity of these four metals starting with the most reactive? 

 A copper → zinc → M → magnesium 

 B copper → M → zinc → magnesium 

 C magnesium → M → zinc → copper 

 D magnesium → zinc → M → copper 

**27** Aluminium is used to make containers for storing food. 

 Which property makes it suitable for this use? 

 A conducts heat 

 B low density 

 C resists corrosion 

 D shiny surface 


© UCLES 2019 0620/23/M/J/19 

**28** Water can be treated by filtration then chlorination. 

 Which uses do not need water of this quality? 

 1 water for cooling in industry 

 2 water for washing clothes 

 3 water for drinking 

 A 1, 2 and 3 B 1 and 2 only C 1 and 3 only D 2 and 3 only 

**29** Catalytic converters in car exhausts change polluting gases into non-polluting gases. 

 Which statements about oxides of nitrogen and car engines are correct? 

 1 The nitrogen in oxides of nitrogen comes from compounds in petrol. 

 2 The oxygen in oxides of nitrogen comes from the air in the car engine. 

 3 Catalytic converters convert oxides of nitrogen into nitrogen and other gases. 

 A 1 and 2 B 2 and 3 C 2 only D 3 only 

**30** The diagram shows an experiment to investigate how paint affects the rusting of iron. 

 air 

### P Q 

 water 

 iron painted iron 

 What happens to the water level in tubes P and Q? 

 tube P tube Q 

 A falls rises 

 B no change rises 

 C rises falls 

 D rises no change 


© UCLES 2019 0620/23/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**31** Which row about the carbon cycle is correct? 

 process for removing carbon dioxide from the atmosphere 

 process for returning carbon dioxide to the atmosphere 

 A photosynthesis combustion of hydrocarbons 

 B photosynthesis cracking of hydrocarbons 

 C respiration combustion of hydrocarbons 

 D respiration cracking of hydrocarbons 

**32** Ammonia is manufactured in an exothermic reaction. 

 N 2 (g) + 3H 2 (g) 2NH 3 (g) 

 What is the effect of lowering the temperature on the rate of formation and equilibrium yield of ammonia? 

 rate of formation equilibrium yield 

 A decreases decreases 

 B decreases increases 

 C increases decreases 

 D increases increases 

**33** Which row shows the conditions used in the Contact process? 

 temperature / °C 

 pressure / atm catalyst 

 A 25 2 iron 

 B 25 200 iron 

## C 450 2 vanadium(V) oxide 

## D 450 200 vanadium(V) oxide 


© UCLES 2019 0620/23/M/J/19 

**34** The diagram represents a lime kiln used to heat limestone to a very high temperature. 

 air in 

 fuel in fuel in 

 air in 

### X 

 waste gases 

 limestone 

 lime kiln 

 What leaves the kiln at X? 

 A calcium carbonate 

 B calcium hydroxide 

 C calcium oxide 

 D calcium sulfate 

**35** Which fuel could be gasoline? 

 Is it obtained from petroleum? 

 Is it used as fuel for cars? 

 Is it used as fuel for cars? 

 yes no 

 yes no 

### A B C D 

 yes no 


© UCLES 2019 0620/23/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**36** Which statements about homologous series are correct? 

 1 All members have similar chemical properties. 

 2 All members have the same molecular mass. 

 3 Ethane and ethene are members of the same homologous series. 

 4 Ethane and propane are members of the same homologous series. 

 A 1 and 3 B 1 and 4 C 2 and 3 D 2 and 4 

**37** Which type of reaction takes place when methane reacts with chlorine in the presence of ultraviolet light? 

 A addition 

 B cracking 

 C polymerisation 

 D substitution 

**38** Which statement about aqueous ethanoic acid is correct? 

 A It reacts with metal carbonates to form salts, hydrogen and water. 

 B It reacts with metal oxides to form salts and oxygen. 

 C It reacts with reactive metals to form salts and hydrogen. 

 D It turns damp red litmus paper blue. 

**39** The structure of ester W is shown. 

### H C 

### H 

### H 

### C 

### O 

### O C 

### H 

### H 

### H 

 Which row gives the names of ester W and the carboxylic acid and alcohol from which it is made? 

 name of ester W carboxylic acid alcohol 

 A ethyl methanoate ethanoic acid methanol 

 B ethyl methanoate methanoic acid ethanol 

 C methyl ethanoate ethanoic acid methanol 

 D methyl ethanoate methanoic acid ethanol 


© UCLES 2019 0620/23/M/J/19 

**40** A section of a polymer is shown. 

### C 

### H 

### H 

### O C 

### O 

### C O 

### H 

### H 

### C 

### H 

### H 

### C 

### O 

### C 

### H 

### H 

### C 

### H 

### H 

### O C 

### O 

### C O 

### H 

### H 

### C 

### H 

### H 

### C 

### O 

### C 

### H 

### H 

 How many different types of monomer units formed this section of polymer? 

 A 1 B 2 C 3 D 4 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2019 0620/23/M/J/19 

### BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2019 0620/23/M/J/19 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements 

(^1) H hydrogen 1 (^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III IV V^ VI VII VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Be beryllium 9 atomic number atomic symbol **Key**^ name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mg magnesium 24 19 K potassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Sr strontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Ge germanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 (^22) Tititanium (^4840) Zr zirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rf rutherfordium 

- 

 23 V vanadium 

(^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Cr chromium (^5242) Mo molybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sg seaborgium 

- 

(^25) Mn manganese (^5543) Tc technetium – (^75) Re rhenium^186107 Bhbohrium 

- 

(^26) Feiron (^5644) Ru ruthenium^101 (^76) Ososmium (^190108) Hs hassium 

- 

(^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Iriridium (^192109) Mt meitnerium 

- 

(^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pd palladium^106 (^78) Ptplatinum (^195110) Ds darmstadtium 

- 

(^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rg roentgenium 

- 

(^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cd cadmium^112 (^80) Hgmercury (^201112) Cn copernicium 

- 

 114 F 

 l flerovium 

- 

(^116) Lv livermorium 

- 

(^7) N nitrogen^1415 Pphosphorus^3133 Asarsenic^7551 Sbantimony^12283 Bibismuth^209 (^8) O oxygen^1616 Ssulfur^3234 Seselenium^7952 Tetellurium^12884 Popolonium 

- 

(^9) F fluorine^1917 C _l_ chlorine35.5^35 Brbromine^8053 I iodine 12785 At astatine 

- 

(^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Sc scandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71 lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) La lanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). actinium 

- 

(^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium (^14191) Pa protactinium 231 (^60) Nd neodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pm promethium – (^93) Np neptunium 

- 

(^62) Sm samarium^150 (^94) Pu plutonium 

- 

(^63) Eu europium^152 (^95) Am americium 

- 

(^64) Gd gadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bk berkelium 

- 

(^66) Dy dysprosium 16398 Cf californium 

- 

(^67) Ho holmium^165 (^99) Es einsteinium 

- 

(^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Md mendelevium 

- 

(^70) Yb ytterbium^173102 Nonobelium 

- 

(^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lr lawrencium 

- 


