 This syllabus is regulated for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 16 printed pages. IB19 06_0620_13/3RP© UCLES 2019 [Turn over 

# *3401923072* 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/13 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) May/June 2019 Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet^ 45 minutes Soft clean eraserSoft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil.Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unlessthis has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

There areanswers **A** (^) , **forty B** , **C** questions on this paper. Answerand **D**. **all** questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the **one** you consider correct and record your choice in **soft pencil** on the separate Answer Sheet. **Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully.** Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer.Any rough working should be done in this booklet. A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16.Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/13/M/J/19 

**1** Which row describes the arrangement and motion of the particles in a liquid? 

 arrangement motion A irregular and most particles touching moving slowly B irregular spaces between all particles moving slowly C regular and most particles touching moving slowly D regular spaces between all particles moving quickly 

**2** Which piece of apparatus is used to measure 24.8 cm^3 of gas produced during a reaction? **A** beaker **B** conical flask **C** measuring cylinder **D** pipette 

**3** Calcium carbonate is insoluble in water. Sodium chloride is soluble in water. Which sequence of steps is used to obtain a pure, dry sample of calcium carbonate from a mixture of calcium carbonate and aqueous sodium chloride? **A** filter → dry the residue with filter paper → wash the residue with water **B** filter → heat the filtrate to crystallising point → leave the filtrate to cool and crystallise **C** filter → wash the filtrate with water → dry the filtrate **D** filter → wash the residue with water→ dry the residue 


© UCLES 2019 0620/13/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**4** A student uses paper chromatography to identify the food dyes in a coloured sweet, S. The student uses four known food dyes, W, X, Y, and Z, and ethanol as the solvent. The chromatogram obtained is shown. 

## W X Y Z S 

 Which statements are correct? 1 S contains only two dyes. 2 X is insoluble in ethanol. 3 S contains Y and Z. 4 S contains W. A 1, 2 and 4 only B 2 and 3 only C 2 and 4 only D 4 only 


© UCLES 2019 0620/13/M/J/19 

**5** The structure of an atom is shown. 

 7p8n 

 key = electron n= neutron p= proton 

 Which element is the atom an isotope of? A nitrogen B oxygen C phosphorus D titanium 

**6** What happens when sodium atoms combine with chlorine atoms to form sodium chloride? **A** Sodium atoms gain one electron and chlorine atoms lose one electron. **B** Sodium atoms lose one electron and chlorine atoms gain one electron. **C** Sodium atoms and chlorine atoms share one electron with each other. **D** Sodium atoms and chlorine atoms share two electrons with each other. 

**7** Which row describes the formation of single covalent bonds in methane? 

 A atoms share a pair of electrons^ noble gas electronic structureboth atoms gain a B atoms share a pair of electrons^ both atoms have the same numberof electrons in their outer shell C electrons are transferred from oneatom to another noble gas electronic structureboth atoms gain a D electrons are transferred from oneatom to another both atoms have the same numberof electrons in their outer shell 

**8** Which statement about diamond is correct? **A** It is a giant covalent structure consisting of carbon atoms and each atom is bonded to four other atoms. **B** It is a giant covalent structure consisting of flat sheets of carbon atoms. **C** It is a structure held together by ionic bonds and each ion is bonded to four other ions. **D** It is a structure held together by ionic bonds and each ion is bonded to three other ions. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/13/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**9** The compound magnesium nitrate has the formula Mg(NO 3 ) 2. What is the relative formula mass of magnesium nitrate? **A** 86 **B** 134 **C** 148 **D** 172 

**10** Which substance does **not** produce a gas at both electrodes during electrolysis? **A** concentrated aqueous sodium chloride **B** concentrated hydrochloric acid **C** dilute sulfuric acid 

# D molten lead(II) bromide 

**11** Which row describes the changes that occur when metals burn in oxygen? 

 temperature metal is A decreases oxidised B decreases reduced C increases oxidised D increases reduced 

**12** Which process is a physical change? **A** burning magnesium in air **B** dissolving sodium chloride in water **C** adding magnesium to hydrochloric acid 

# D heating green copper(II) carbonate until it turns black 


© UCLES 2019 0620/13/M/J/19 

**13** A student reacts strips of zinc with dilute sulfuric acid and measures the time taken to produce 100 cm (^3) of hydrogen. The experiment is repeated using different conditions. The results are shown in the table. experiment time to produce 100of hydrogen / s^ cm^3 1 250 2 100 Which changes in conditions produce the results shown in experiment 2? 1 Add a catalyst. 2 Dilute the acid. 3 Use zinc powder. 4 Heat the acid. **A** 1, 3 and 4 only **B** 1 and 4 only **C** 2 and 3 only **D** 2 and 4 only 

# 14 When blue-green crystals of nickel(remains. When water is added to the yellow solid, the blue-green colour returns.II) sulfate are heated, water is produced and a yellow solid 

 Which process describes these changes? A combustion B corrosion C neutralisation D reversible reaction 

**15** Zinc is formed when zinc oxide is heated with carbon. zinc oxide + carbon → zinc + carbon monoxide Which substance is oxidised in this reaction? **A** carbon **B** carbon monoxide **C** zinc **D** zinc oxide 


© UCLES 2019 0620/13/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**16** Which row shows the colours of litmus and methyl orange with solutions of acids and bases? 

 solution litmus methyl orange A acid red red B acid blue yellow C base blue red D base red yellow 

**17** The positions of elements W, X, Y and Z in the Periodic Table are shown. 

 W 

## X 

## Y 

## Z 

 Which elements form basic oxides? A W, X and Y B W and X only C Y only D Z only 

# 18 Copper(II) sulfate is made when copper(II) carbonate reacts with dilute sulfuric acid. 

 CuCO 3 + H 2 SO 4 → CuSO 4 + H 2 O + CO 2 

# Pure copper(II) sulfate crystals are obtained. 

 Which reagent is in excess and how are the crystals obtained? reagent in excess how the crystals are obtained 

# A copper(II) carbonate filter and evaporate the solution to dryness 

# B copper(II) carbonate filter, evaporate to crystallising point and then cool 

 C dilute sulfuric acid evaporate the solution to dryness D dilute sulfuric acid evaporate to crystallising point and then cool 


© UCLES 2019 0620/13/M/J/19 

**19** Two separate tests are done on a solution of a compound, X. The results are shown. 1 Adding aqueous ammonia forms a blue precipitate that dissolves in an excess of aqueous ammonia. 2 Adding dilute nitric acid and aqueous barium nitrate forms a white precipitate. What is X? 

# A chromium(III) chloride 

# B chromium(III) sulfate 

# C copper(II) chloride 

# D copper(II) sulfate 

**20** Part of the Periodic Table is shown. 

## X Y Z 

## W 

 Which row describes W, X, Y and Z? metal non-metal A X W, Y and Z B X and Y W and Z C W and Z X and Y D W, Y and Z X 

**21** Which statement about the properties of elements in Group I and in Group VII is correct? **A** Bromine displaces iodine from an aqueous solution of potassium iodide. **B** Chlorine, bromine and iodine are diatomic gases at room temperature. **C** Lithium, sodium and potassium are soft non-metals. **D** Lithium, sodium and potassium have an increasing number of electrons in their outer shells. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/13/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**22** Some information about four elements, P, Q, R and S, is shown. 

 melting point in °C in gdensity / cm^3 colour ofchloride P 1247 7.43 pink Q 1410 2.33 white R 1910 6.11 purple S 115 2.07 red Which elements are transition elements? A P and R B P and S C Q and R D R and S 

**23** Gasmonoatomic. G has 10 electrons. Gas H has eight more electrons than gas G. Both gases are 

 Which statement about G and H is correct? A Both gases are in the same group of the Periodic Table. B Both gases are in the same period of the Periodic Table. C Both gases are very reactive. D Gas G has a higher atomic mass than gas H. 

**24** The diagrams show the structure of two substances used to make electrical conductors. X Y 

 Which statement correctly describes X and Y? A X is a pure metal and Y is a compound. B X is a pure metal and Y is an alloy. C X is a solid and Y is a liquid. D X is harder and stronger than Y. 


© UCLES 2019 0620/13/M/J/19 

**25** Three metals, L, M and N, are added separately to dilute hydrochloric acid and cold water. The results are shown. 

metal (^) hydrochloric acidreaction with reaction withcold water L hydrogen forms no reaction M hydrogen forms hydrogen forms N no reaction no reaction What is the order of reactivity of the metals? least reactive most reactive **A** L N M **B** M L N **C** N L M **D** N M L **26** Iron is extracted from its ore in a blast furnace. Hematite, coke, limestone and hot air are added to the furnace. Which explanation is **not** correct? **A** Coke burns and produces a high temperature. 

# B Hematite is the ore containing the iron as iron(III) oxide. 

 C Hot air provides the oxygen for the burning. 

# D Limestone reduces the iron(III) oxide to iron. 

**27** Aluminium is used to make containers for storing food. Which property makes it suitable for this use? **A** conducts heat **B** low density **C** resists corrosion **D** shiny surface 


© UCLES 2019 0620/13/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**28** Water can be treated by filtration then chlorination. Which uses do **not** need water of this quality? 1 water for cooling in industry 2 water for washing clothes 3 water for drinking **A** 1, 2 and 3 **B** 1 and 2 only **C** 1 and 3 only **D** 2 and 3 only 

**29** Which statement about acid rain is **not** correct? **A** It causes limestone buildings and statues to erode. **B** It is formed from the burning of compounds which contain sulfur. **C** It is formed from the combustion of hydrogen as a fuel. **D** It is formed from the oxides of nitrogen formed in car engines. 

**30** The diagram shows an experiment to investigate how paint affects the rusting of iron. 

 air 

## P Q 

 water 

 iron painted iron 

 What happens to the water level in tubes P and Q? tube P tube Q A falls rises B no change rises C rises falls D rises no change 


© UCLES 2019 0620/13/M/J/19 

**31** Which gas is produced when ammonium chloride is warmed with aqueous sodium hydroxide? **A** ammonia **B** chlorine **C** hydrogen **D** nitrogen 

**32** Which statement describes a disadvantage of sulfur dioxide? **A** It can be used as a bleach when making wood pulp. **B** It can be used to kill bacteria in food. **C** It can be used to manufacture sulfuric acid. **D** It dissolves in water to form acid rain. 

**33** The diagram represents a lime kiln used to heat limestone to a very high temperature. 

 air in 

 fuel in fuel in 

 air in X 

 waste gases 

 limestone 

 lime kiln 

 What leaves the kiln at X? A calcium carbonate B calcium hydroxide C calcium oxide D calcium sulfate 


© UCLES 2019 0620/13/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**34** The structures of four compounds are shown. 

## C C 

## 1 2 3 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H C C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## 4 

## H C C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## C C OH 

## O 

## OH 

 Which row gives the names of the compounds? 1 2 3 4 A ethene ethane ethanol ethanoic acid B ethane ethene ethanoic acid ethanol C ethene ethane ethanoic acid ethanol D ethane ethene ethanol ethanoic acid 

**35** Which fuel could be gasoline? 

 Is it obtained from petroleum? 

 Is it used as fuel for cars? 

 Is it used as fuel for cars? 

 yes no 

 yes no A B C D 

 yes no 


© UCLES 2019 0620/13/M/J/19 

**36** A hydrocarbon W burns to form carbon dioxide and water. W decolourises bromine water. What is the name of W and what is its structure? name of W structure of W 

 A ethane^ C 

## H 

## H H 

## H 

## C 

## H H 

 B ethane C^ C H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

 C ethene C 

## H 

## H H 

## H 

## C 

## H H 

 D ethene C^ C H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

**37** Which statements about homologous series are correct? 1 All members have similar chemical properties. 2 All members have the same molecular mass. 3 Ethane and ethene are members of the same homologous series. 4 Ethane and propane are members of the same homologous series. **A** 1 and 3 **B** 1 and 4 **C** 2 and 3 **D** 2 and 4 

**38** Which statements about ethanol are correct? 1 It can be made by fermentation. 2 It is an unsaturated compound. 3 It burns in air and can be used as a fuel. **A** 1, 2 and 3 **B** 1 and 2 only **C** 1 and 3 only **D** 2 and 3 only 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeAssessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University ofCambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2019 0620/13/M/J/19 

**39** Which statement about aqueous ethanoic acid is correct? **A** It reacts with metal carbonates to form salts, hydrogen and water. **B** It reacts with metal oxides to form salts and oxygen. **C** It reacts with reactive metals to form salts and hydrogen. **D** It turns damp red litmus paper blue. 

**40** Which substances are synthetic polymers? 1 _Terylene_ 2 nylon 3 protein 4 poly(ethene) **A** 1, 2 and 4 **B** 1 only **C** 2 and 3 **D** 3 and 4 


© UCLES 2019 0620/13/M/J/19 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements^1 Hhydrogen^1 

(^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Beberyllium 9 **Key** atomic numberatomic symbol name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mgmagnesium 24 19 Kpotassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Srstrontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Gegermanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 (^22) Tititanium (^4840) Zrzirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rfrutherfordium– 23 Vvanadium (^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Crchromium (^5242) Momolybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sgseaborgium– (^25) Mnmanganese (^5543) Tctechnetium– (^75) Rerhenium (^186107) Bhbohrium– (^26) Feiron (^5644) Ruruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Iriridium (^192109) Mtmeitnerium– (^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pdpalladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Dsdarmstadtium– (^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rgroentgenium– (^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cdcadmium (^11280) Hgmercury (^201112) Cncopernicium– 114 F _l_ flerovium– (^116) Lvlivermorium– (^7) Nnitrogen 1415 Pphosphorus (^3133) Asarsenic (^7551) Sbantimony 12283 Bibismuth 209 (^8) Ooxygen 1616 Ssulfur (^3234) Seselenium (^7952) Tetellurium (^12884) Popolonium– (^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Brbromine 8053 I iodine 12785 Atastatine– (^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Scscandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) Lalanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). actinium– (^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium^141 (^91) Paprotactinium 231 (^60) Ndneodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pmpromethium– (^93) Npneptunium– (^62) Smsamarium (^15094) Puplutonium– (^63) Eueuropium (^15295) Amamericium– (^64) Gdgadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bkberkelium– (^66) Dydysprosium 16398 Cfcalifornium– (^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Eseinsteinium– (^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Mdmendelevium– (^70) Ybytterbium (^173102) Nonobelium– (^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lrlawrencium– 


