 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 17 printed pages and 3 blank pages. 

 IB15 11_0610_11_ML/RP © UCLES 2015 [Turn over 

# *2377085453* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## BIOLOGY 0610/11 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice October/November 2015 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 MODIFIED LANGUAGE 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2015 0610/11/O/N/15 

**1** Which process releases the most energy from one molecule of glucose? 

 A aerobic respiration 

 B anaerobic respiration in muscle 

 C anaerobic respiration in yeast 

 D photosynthesis 

**2** The diagram shows some leaves and flowers of different plants. 

## 1 2 3 4 5 

 Which are from monocotyledons? 

 A 1 and 3 B 1 and 5 C 2 and 4 D 2 and 5 


© UCLES 2015 0610/11/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

**3** The list shows the scientific names for eight animals, using the binomial system. 

 Alderia modesta 

 Arenicola cristata 

 Arenicola marina 

 Austrominius modestus 

 Bittium reticulatum 

 Botrylloides leachii 

 Botryllus schlosseri 

 Clypeostoma reticulatum 

 Which two animals are most closely related? 

 A Alderia modesta and Austrominius modestus 

 B Arenicola cristata and Arenicola marina 

 C Bittium reticulatum and Clypeostoma reticulatum 

 D Botryllus schlosseri and Botrylloides leachii 

**4** The diagram shows a flower seen from above. 

 Use the key to find the name of the family to which it belongs. 

 1 four petals ............................................... go to 2 

 five petals ............................................... go to 3 

 2 two stamens ........................................... A Scrophulariaceae 

 six stamens ............................................ B Brassicaceae 

 3 petals joined............................................ C Caryophyllaceae 

 petals separate ...................................... D Rosaceae 


© UCLES 2015 0610/11/O/N/15 

**5** Three cell structures are listed. 

 1 cell wall 

 2 cytoplasm 

 3 nucleus 

 Which structures are found in palisade cells and in liver cells? 

 A 1 and 2 B 1 only C 2 and 3 D 3 only 

**6** The diagram shows two plant cells, P and Q. 

 cell P cell Q 

 How does cell P differ from cell Q? 

 A It has no cell wall. 

 B It has no chloroplasts. 

 C It has no nucleus. 

 D It has no vacuole. 

**7** The diagram shows different types of cells. 

 Which structure do all these cells have? 

 A cell membrane 

 B cell wall 

 C chloroplast 

 D nucleus 


© UCLES 2015 0610/11/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

**8** The diagram shows a male gamete. 

 Which term describes the level of organisation of this gamete? 

 A cell 

 B organ 

 C organism 

 D tissue 

**9** Which description of xylem is correct? 

 A a cell used for absorption 

 B a tissue used for support 

 C an organ system used for conduction 

 D an organ used for transport 

**10** The diagram shows a fish in a pond. 

 Why does oxygen diffuse from the air into the water before reaching the fish? 

 A Oxygen is more concentrated in the air than in the water. 

 B Oxygen is more concentrated in the water than in the air. 

 C Oxygen is needed by the fish for aerobic respiration. 

 D Oxygen is needed by the fish for anaerobic respiration. 

**11** Which structure provides the best surface for diffusion? 

 A atrium 

 B bronchioles 

 C ileum 

 D trachea 


© UCLES 2015 0610/11/O/N/15 

**12** What is true of **all** enzymes? 

 they are sugars they are most effectiveat pH7 

## A   

## B   

## C   

## D   

**13** The diagram shows a piece of small intestine during peristalsis. 

 direction of peristalsis 

## X 

 What is happening at X? 

 circular muscles longitudinal muscles 

 A contracted contracted 

 B contracted relaxed 

 C relaxed contracted 

 D relaxed relaxed 


© UCLES 2015 0610/11/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

**14** A plant with striped leaves similar to the one below was kept in bright light for six hours. 

 white stripe 

 green stripe 

 A leaf was taken from the plant and the chlorophyll removed. It was then tested for starch using iodine solution. 

 Which diagram shows the result of the test? 

 yellow-brown 

 blue-black 

## A 

 white 

 blue-black 

## B 

 blue-black 

 green 

## C 

 yellow-brown 

 green 

## D 

**15** The diagram shows the human alimentary canal. 

 Which structure does not secrete digestive enzymes? 

## A 

## D 

## C 

## B 


© UCLES 2015 0610/11/O/N/15 

**16** Which substance is lost from the body of a healthy person by the kidneys, but **not** by the lungs? 

 A carbon dioxide 

 B glucose 

 C urea 

 D water 

**17** Which statement is correct for **most** veins in the human body? 

 A They carry blood at high pressure. 

 B They have a pulse. 

 C They have valves. 

 D They take blood away from the heart. 

**18** What is transported in the phloem and what is the direction of transport? 

 A starch, up and down 

 B starch, up only 

 C sucrose, down and up 

 D sucrose, down only 


© UCLES 2015 0610/11/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

**19** Apparatus was set up as shown. 

 air 

 sodium hydroxide solution flask X 

 black paper 

 plant flask Y 

 to pump 

 limewater limewater 

 Sodium hydroxide removes carbon dioxide from the air. Limewater goes cloudy if carbon dioxide is bubbled through it. 

 What happens to the limewater in flasks X and Y when the pump is switched on? 

 flask X flask Y 

 A goes cloudy goes cloudy 

 B goes cloudy stays clear 

 C stays clear goes cloudy 

 D stays clear stays clear 

**20** The diagram shows apparatus used to investigate anaerobic respiration in yeast. 

 yeast in a glucose solution 

 glass tube 

 coloured liquid 

 air from which oxygen has been removed 

 What happens to the coloured liquid? 

 A moves rapidly to the left 

 B moves slowly to the left 

 C moves to the right 

 D stays still 


© UCLES 2015 0610/11/O/N/15 

**21** Why do mammals sweat? 

 A to cool the body 

 B to lose water vapour through the skin surface 

 C to release energy through the oxidation of glucose 

 D to remove glucose from the blood 

**22** The diagram shows a section through part of the human eye. 

 suspensory ligaments 

 lens 

 When a person looks at an object which is far away from their eye, which of the following happens? 

 suspensory ligaments lens 

 A slacken becomes fatter 

 B slacken becomes thinner 

 C tighten becomes fatter 

 D tighten becomes thinner 


© UCLES 2015 0610/11/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

**23** The diagram shows half a flower. 

 On which structure would pollen be deposited in pollination? 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 

**24** In which region does diffusion of materials take place between mother and fetus? 

 A amniotic sac 

 B ovary 

 C placenta 

 D umbilical cord 

**25** During childbirth, what must happen to the cervix and the uterus wall? 

 cervix uterus wall 

 A contracts contracts and relaxes 

 B contracts relaxes 

 C dilates contracts and relaxes 

 D dilates relaxes 


© UCLES 2015 0610/11/O/N/15 

**26** The diagram shows a baby, a child and an adult (not drawn to the same scale). 

 As a baby grows into an adult, which labelled region grows the most? 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 

**27** Four tubes were set up as shown and placed in the dark. 

 In which tube would the seeds germinate first? 

 A B C D 

## 0 °C 25 °C 25 °C 25 °C 

 seeds 

 moist cotton wool cotton wool 

 seeds dry cotton wool 

 water with oxygen removed 

 oil 


© UCLES 2015 0610/11/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

**28** The graph shows the height of a child, from birth to the age of 10. 

## 0 2 4 6 8 10 

## 140 

## 120 

## 100 

## 80 

## 60 

## 40 

## 20 

## 0 

 age / years 

 height / cm 

 What was the approximate height of the child at 7 years of age? 

 A 106 cm B 116 cm C 122 cm D 130 cm 

**29** Which statement about the human sex chromosomes is correct? 

 A All boys have two Y chromosomes. 

 B Everybody has at least one X chromosome. 

 C Girls have a Y chromosome and an X chromosome. 

 D Nobody has two X chromosomes. 

**30** What results from meiosis of a diploid cell? 

 A genetically different diploid cells 

 B genetically different haploid cells 

 C genetically identical diploid cells 

 D genetically identical haploid cells 


 © UCLES 2015 0610/11/O/N/15 

 31 Which pathway is taken by energy from the Sun? 

 A chemical energy in carbohydrates 

 stored in plants trapped by chlorophyll 

## B 

 chemical energy in carbohydrates 

 stored in plants trapped by chlorophyll 

## C 

 chemical energy in carbohydrates 

 trapped by stored in plants chlorophyll 

## D 

 chemical energy in carbohydrates 

 stored in plants 

 trapped by chlorophyll 

 32 The diagram shows a food chain. 

 insect-eating lettuce greenflies ladybirds birds hawks 

 If the hawks are removed from this food chain, what is likely to happen to the numbers of the other organisms in this chain? 

 greenflies ladybirds insect-eating birds 

 A decrease increase decrease 

 B decrease increase increase 

 C increase decrease decrease 

 D increase decrease increase 

**33** The diagram shows a food web including a producer, consumers and a decomposer. 

 Which organism is the decomposer? 

 organism D 

 organism B 

 organism C 

 organism A 


© UCLES 2015 0610/11/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

**34** Which organisms remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere? 

 A carnivores 

 B decomposers 

 C herbivores 

 D producers 

**35** Which process is **not** part of the carbon cycle? 

 A combustion 

 B photosynthesis 

 C respiration 

 D transpiration 

**36** The diagram shows a simple water cycle. 

 tree 

 soil 

 cloud 

 rain 

 What is responsible for water loss from the tree? 

 A evaporation 

 B photosynthesis 

 C respiration 

 D translocation 


© UCLES 2015 0610/11/O/N/15 

**37** The diagram shows the age structure of a human population. 

## 1.5 1.0 0.5 0 0.5 1.0 1.5 

 population (millions) 

 age (years) 60 and over 45 – 59 30 – 44 15 – 29 under 15 

 males females 

 Which age group has the largest number of people? 

 A 60 and over 

 B 45-59 

 C 30-44 

 D under 15 

**38** What is a reason for conserving plant species? 

 A to absorb oxygen from the air 

 B to decrease rainfall 

 C to obtain drugs for medicinal use 

 D to release carbon dioxide into the air 

**39** What is **reduced** after deforestation? 

 A force of rain hitting the ground 

 B rainwater run-off 

 C soil erosion 

 D soil fertility 


© UCLES 2015 0610/11/O/N/15 

**40** The diagram shows four positions on a river where water samples were taken. 

## W 

## X 

## Y Z 

 direction of flow 

 untreated sewage outlet 

 Which graph shows oxygen concentrations in the river? 

## W X 

## B 

## Y Z 

 oxygen concentration 

## W X 

## A 

## Y Z 

 oxygen concentration 

## W X 

## D 

## Y Z 

 oxygen concentration 

## W X 

## C 

## Y Z 

 oxygen concentration 

 position 

 position position 

 position 


© UCLES 2015 0610/11/O/N/15 

## BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2015 0610/11/O/N/15 

## BLANK PAGE 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2015 0610/11/O/N/15 

## BLANK PAGE 


