 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. 

 IB15 11_0610_13_A3/FP © UCLES 2015 [Turn over 

#  

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## BIOLOGY 0610/13 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice October/November 2015 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2015 0610/13/O/N/15 

**1** What are the characteristics of bony fish? 

 maintain constant body temperature 

 external ears present 

 jelly-covered eggs scales 

## A     

## B     

## C     

## D     

**2** What are the features of the leaves of a plant that is a eudicotyledon (dicotyledon)? 

 broad leaves parallel veins 

 A   

 B   

 C   

 D   

**3** Many snakes that belong to the viper family are unusual in that they give birth to live young. 

 This is usually a characteristic of which vertebrate group? 

 A amphibians 

 B birds 

 C bony fish 

 D mammals 

**4** Use the key to identify which group is amphibians. 

 1 hair present …………………………… mammals 

 hair absent ……………………………. go to 2 

 2 feathers present ………………….…… group A 

 feathers absent ………………….……. go to 3 

 3 dry scaly skin……………………….….. group B 

 moist skin ………………….……….….. go to 4 

 4 four limbs …………………………….… group C 

 no limbs ………...…………….....…...… group D 


© UCLES 2015 0610/13/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

**5** The diagram shows a liver cell. 

 Which features are present in this cell and also in most plant cells? 

 A cell membrane and cytoplasm 

 B cell membrane and sap vacuole 

 C cell wall and cytoplasm 

 D cell wall and sap vacuole 

**6** Which structure is present in a root hair cell but **not** in a liver cell? 

 A cell wall 

 B chloroplast 

 C glycogen granule 

 D nucleus 

**7** Which description of the heart is correct? 

 A The heart is an organ, containing several systems, which forms part of the circulatory tissue. 

 B The heart is an organ, containing several tissues, which forms part of the circulatory system. 

 C The heart is a system, containing several organs, which forms part of the circulatory tissue. 

 D The heart is a system, containing several tissues, which forms part of the circulatory organ. 

**8** The diagram shows four cells. 

 1 2 3 4 

 Which two cells contain cellulose and a vacuole? 

 A 1 and 2 B 1 and 4 C 2 and 3 D 2 and 4 


© UCLES 2015 0610/13/O/N/15 

**9** The diagrams show how a cell appears under the microscope at the start of an experiment and after it has been placed in a dilute solution of salts for 5 minutes. 

 after placing in a dilute solution of salts 

 start of the experiment 

 Which statement explains what happens? 

 A Dissolved salts enter the cell by diffusion. 

 B Dissolved salts leave the cell by diffusion. 

 C Water enters the cell by osmosis. 

 D Water leaves the cell by osmosis. 

**10** The diagram represents the molecules in two solutions either side of a **fully permeable** membrane. 

 fully permeable membrane 

 Key solute molecules water molecules 

 In which directions are the net movements of the molecules? 

 solute molecules water molecules 

 A left to right left to right 

 B left to right right to left 

 C right to left left to right 

 D right to left right to left 


© UCLES 2015 0610/13/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

**11** Which group of compounds ensures that metabolic reactions take place effectively? 

 A carbohydrates 

 B enzymes 

 C fatty acids 

 D hormones 

**12** Four different foods were tested for their composition. 

 The results are shown in the table. 

 Which food contains protein but not reducing sugar or starch? 

 Benedict’s test iodine test biuret test 

 A blue black purple 

 B blue brown purple 

 C brick red black blue 

 D brick red brown blue 

**13** What are the smaller basic units of starch and glycogen molecules? 

 starch glycogen 

 A amino acids fatty acids and glycerol 

 B amino acids simple sugars 

 C simple sugars fatty acids and glycerol 

 D simple sugars simple sugars 


© UCLES 2015 0610/13/O/N/15 

**14** A plant with striped leaves similar to the one below was kept in bright light for six hours. 

 white stripe 

 green stripe 

 A leaf was taken from the plant and the chlorophyll removed. It was then tested for starch using iodine solution. 

 Which diagram shows the result of the test? 

 yellow-brown 

 blue-black 

## A 

 white 

 blue-black 

## B 

 blue-black 

 green 

## C 

 yellow-brown 

 green 

## D 

**15** Which substances are transported in the phloem? 

 A amino acids and starch 

 B amino acids and sucrose 

 C protein and starch 

 D starch and sucrose 

**16** The diagrams show some components of the blood of a mammal. 

 Which component causes the blood to start clotting? 

 A B C D 


© UCLES 2015 0610/13/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

**17** Where are hormones removed from the blood and broken down in the human body? 

 A gall bladder 

 B kidneys 

 C liver 

 D stomach 

**18** The list shows four metabolic processes. 

 1 carbon dioxide + water  glucose + oxygen 

 2 glucose  alcohol + carbon dioxide 

 3 glucose  lactic acid 

 4 glucose + oxygen  carbon dioxide + water 

 Which of these processes occur in muscles? 

 A 1 and 2 B 2 and 3 C 3 and 4 D 4 and 1 

**19** The diagram shows apparatus used to investigate anaerobic respiration in yeast. 

 yeast in a glucose solution 

 glass tube 

 coloured liquid 

 air from which oxygen has been removed 

 What happens to the coloured liquid? 

 A moves rapidly to the left 

 B moves slowly to the left 

 C moves to the right 

 D stays still 


© UCLES 2015 0610/13/O/N/15 

**20** The diagram shows some of the structures in a human lung. 

 Where is the carbon dioxide concentration highest? 

 to pulmonary vein 

 from pulmonary artery 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 

**21** Where is urea produced in the human body and from which chemicals is it produced? 

 produced chemical 

 A intestine proteins 

 B kidneys amino acids 

 C kidneys fatty acids 

 D liver amino acids 


© UCLES 2015 0610/13/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

**22** The table shows the composition of a liquid found in the human body. 

 component concentration / arbitrary units 

 amino acids 0.00 

 glucose 0.00 

 proteins 0.00 

 salts 1.50 

 urea 2.00 

 In a healthy person, which structure contains this liquid? 

## A 

## B C 

## D 

**23** The diagram shows muscles and bones in a person’s arm. 

 weight 

 biceps 

 triceps 

 What happens to the muscles as the weight is lowered? 

 biceps triceps 

 A lengthens lengthens 

 B lengthens shortens 

 C shortens lengthens 

 D shortens shortens 


© UCLES 2015 0610/13/O/N/15 

**24** In an experiment to investigate phototropism, a plant shoot is grown with light coming from one side only. 

 After two days, in which region has the greatest rate of growth occurred? 

 start of experiment 

 light 

 after two days 

 light 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 

**25** Which structure is involved in the transfer of dissolved nutrients from the mother to the fetus? 

 A kidney 

 B liver 

 C placenta 

 D stomach 

**26** The diagram shows the human female reproductive system. 

 After ejaculation, along which route does a male gamete travel to fuse with an egg? 

 A ovary  oviduct  uterus  cervix 

 B ovary  uterus  cervix  vagina 

 C vagina  cervix  uterus  oviduct 

 D vagina  uterus  cervix  oviduct 


© UCLES 2015 0610/13/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

**27** Which set of conditions is required for seed germination? 

 oxygen warmth water 

 A    

 B    

 C    

 D    

**28** The graph shows the height of a child, from birth to the age of 10. 

## 0 2 4 6 8 10 

## 140 

## 120 

## 100 

## 80 

## 60 

## 40 

## 20 

## 0 

 age / years 

 height / cm 

 What was the approximate height of the child at 7 years of age? 

 A 106 cm B 116 cm C 122 cm D 130 cm 

**29** Which of these cells is haploid? 

 A liver cell 

 B red blood cell 

 C sperm cell 

 D zygote 


© UCLES 2015 0610/13/O/N/15 

**30** What results from meiosis of a diploid cell? 

 A genetically different diploid cells 

 B genetically different haploid cells 

 C genetically identical diploid cells 

 D genetically identical haploid cells 

**31** Which pathway is taken by energy from the Sun? 

**A** (^) in carbohydrateschemical energy stored in plants trapped bychlorophyll 

## B 

 chemical energy in carbohydrates 

 stored in plants trapped by chlorophyll 

## C 

 chemical energy in carbohydrates 

 trapped by stored in plants chlorophyll 

## D 

 chemical energy in carbohydrates 

 stored in plants trapped by chlorophyll 

**32** The diagram shows a food web including a producer, consumers and a decomposer. 

 Which organism is the decomposer? 

 organism D 

 organism B 

 organism C 

 organism A 


© UCLES 2015 0610/13/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

**33** The diagram shows a food chain. 

 insect-eating lettuce greenflies ladybirds birds hawks 

 If the hawks are removed from this food chain, what is likely to happen to the numbers of the other organisms in this chain? 

 greenflies ladybirds insect-eating birds 

 A decrease increase decrease 

 B decrease increase increase 

 C increase decrease decrease 

 D increase decrease increase 

**34** Which organisms remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere? 

 A carnivores 

 B decomposers 

 C herbivores 

 D producers 

**35** The diagram shows a simple water cycle. 

 tree 

 soil 

 cloud 

 rain 

 What is responsible for water loss from the tree? 

 A evaporation 

 B photosynthesis 

 C respiration 

 D translocation 


© UCLES 2015 0610/13/O/N/15 

**36** Which process is **not** part of the carbon cycle? 

 A combustion 

 B photosynthesis 

 C respiration 

 D transpiration 

**37** Which factors affect the rate of growth of a plant population? 

 disease grazing by herbivores light intensity 

 A    

 B    

 C    

 D    

**38** What is a reason for conserving plant species? 

 A to absorb oxygen from the air 

 B to decrease rainfall 

 C to obtain drugs for medicinal use 

 D to release carbon dioxide into the air 

**39** What is **reduced** after deforestation? 

 A force of rain hitting the ground 

 B rainwater run-off 

 C soil erosion 

 D soil fertility 


© UCLES 2015 0610/13/O/N/15 

**40** The diagram shows four positions on a river where water samples were taken. 

## W 

## X 

## Y Z 

 direction of flow 

 untreated sewage outlet 

 Which graph shows oxygen concentrations in the river? 

## W X 

## B 

## Y Z 

 oxygen concentration 

## W X 

## A 

## Y Z 

 oxygen concentration 

## W X 

## D 

## Y Z 

 oxygen concentration 

## W X 

## C 

## Y Z 

 oxygen concentration 

 position 

 position position 

 position 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2015 0610/13/O/N/15 

## BLANK PAGE 


