 This document has 16 pages. Blank pages are indicated. 

 IB20 06_0610_21/3RP 

© UCLES 2020 (^) **[Turn over** 

## *4931717366* 

# Cambridge IGCSE 

## ™ 

### BIOLOGY 0610/21 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) May/June 2020 45 minutes 

 You must answer on the multiple choice answer sheet. 

 You will need: Multiple choice answer sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 INSTRUCTIONS 

- There are **forty** questions on this paper. Answer **all** questions. 

- For each question there are four possible answers **A** , **B** , **C** and **D**. Choose the **one** you consider correct     and record your choice in soft pencil on the multiple choice answer sheet. 

- Follow the instructions on the multiple choice answer sheet. 

- Write in soft pencil. 

- Write your name, centre number and candidate number on the multiple choice answer sheet in the     spaces provided unless this has been done for you. 

- Do **not** use correction fluid. 

- Do **not** write on any bar codes. 

- You may use a calculator. 

 INFORMATION 

- The total mark for this paper is 40. 

- Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. 

- Any rough working should be done on this question paper. 


© UCLES 2020 0610/21/M/J/20 

**1** The diagram shows what happened in an experiment with plant seedlings. 

 start 

 light 

 next day 

 light 

 Which characteristic of living things made the seedlings grow towards the light? 

 A excretion 

 B nutrition 

 C respiration 

 D sensitivity 

**2** A rat has the scientific name _Rattus rattus_. 

 What do the two parts of this name refer to? 

 A genus and species 

 B kingdom and genus 

 C kingdom and species 

 D variety and genus 

**3** The diagram shows two guard cells. 

 Which label shows the cell wall? 

### A 

### B 

### C 

### D 


© UCLES 2020 0610/21/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**4** The diagrams show different levels of organisation in a plant. (Not drawn to scale.) 

### 1 2 3 4 

 Which sequence shows the levels of organisation in order from smallest to largest? 

 A 4 → 2 → 3 → 1 

 B 4 → 3 → 1 → 2 

 C 3 → 4 → 2 → 1 

 D 3 → 2 → 1 → 4 

**5** Which diagram shows the appearance of a plant cell several minutes after it has been placed in a concentrated solution of sugar? 

 A B 

### C D 


© UCLES 2020 0610/21/M/J/20 

**6** Plant cells are placed in a solution with a higher water potential than the plant cell contents. 

 What will happen? 

 direction of water movement 

 volume of vacuole 

 A enters cells decreases 

 B enters cells increases 

 C leaves cells decreases 

 D leaves cells increases 

**7** The diagram shows a section of DNA, with four bases identified on one strand. 

### G 

### A 

### C 

### T 

 Which sequence of bases would be on the other strand, starting from the top? 

 A AGTC B CTGA C GACT D TCAG 

**8** Which food-testing solution shows a positive result when it turns from blue to purple? 

 A Benedict’s solution 

 B biuret solution 

 C ethanol 

 D iodine solution 

**9** What is the definition of an enzyme? 

 A a carbohydrate that acts as a catalyst 

 B a DNA molecule that acts as a catalyst 

 C a fat that acts as a catalyst 

 D a protein that acts as a catalyst 


© UCLES 2020 0610/21/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**10** An experiment is set up to investigate gas exchange in aquatic plants. 

 aquatic plant 

 hydrogencarbonate indicator solution light 

 The hydrogencarbonate indicator solution is orange at the start. 

 Which colour is it after three hours? 

 A blue-black 

 B orange 

 C purple 

 D yellow 

**11** The diagram shows how the rate of photosynthesis varies with light intensity. 

 The four curves show different conditions of temperature and carbon dioxide concentration. 

 rate of photosynthesis 

 light intensity 

30 °C, 0.2% CO (^2) 20 °C, 0.2% CO (^2) 30 °C, 0.1% CO (^2) 20 °C, 0.1% CO (^2) 

### P 

 What limits the rate of photosynthesis at point P? 

 light intensity carbon dioxideconcentration temperature 

 A    key 

 B    = yes 

 C    = no 

 D    


© UCLES 2020 0610/21/M/J/20 

**12** Four test-tubes are set up as shown. 

 Which test-tube contains the least carbon dioxide after one hour? 

 A B C D 

 black polythene to keep out light 

 water 

 aquatic animal 

 aquatic plant 

 light light light 

**13** The activity of amylase is measured in four parts of the alimentary canal. 

 Which two parts have the most amylase activity? 

 A colon and duodenum 

 B colon and stomach 

 C mouth and duodenum 

 D stomach and mouth 

**14** Biological washing powder can be used to remove stains on clothing. 

 Which enzymes will remove stains caused by starch, fat and protein? 

 amylase lipase trypsin 

 A    key 

 B    = removes stain 

 C    = does not remove stain 

 D    


© UCLES 2020 0610/21/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**15** The graph shows the rate of uptake of magnesium ions by two similar plants, X and Y. 

 The roots of each plant were placed in a range of solutions. Each solution contained a different concentration of magnesium ions. All other conditions were kept constant. 

 rate of uptake of ions 

 concentration of magnesium ions in external solution 

 plant X 

 plant Y 

 What is a possible explanation for the difference in the results for the two plants? 

 A Plant Y has fewer protein molecules for magnesium ion transport in its cell membranes. 

 B Plant Y has a higher rate of respiration. 

 C Plant Y has more root hair cells. 

 D The root hair cells in plant Y have a lower water potential. 

**16** What will increase the rate of transpiration in a plant? 

 A an increase in the humidity of the atmosphere surrounding the leaf 

 B an increase in the surface area of the cell surfaces inside the leaf 

 C a decrease in the number of stomata present on the surface of the leaf 

 D a decrease in the temperature of the atmosphere surrounding the leaf 

**17** Which pathway is taken by blood in a fish? 

 A gills → heart → body → gills 

 B body → gills → heart → body 

 C heart → gills → body → heart 

 D heart → body → gills → body 


© UCLES 2020 0610/21/M/J/20 

**18** The diagram shows a section through the heart and its blood vessels. 

 X 

 Which row gives the vessel name and the direction of blood flow in vessel X? 

 vessel name direction of blood flow 

 A aorta towards the lungs 

 B pulmonary artery towards the lungs 

 C pulmonary artery away from the lungs 

 D vena cava away from the lungs 

**19** When a pathogen enters the blood, the immune system uses different mechanisms to destroy the pathogen. 

 The diagram shows one of these mechanisms. 

### X 

### Y 

 pathogen 

 Which row describes the structures involved? 

 structure X X is made by structure Y 

 A antigen lymphocytes antibody 

 B antigen phagocytes antibody 

 C antibody lymphocytes antigen 

 D antibody phagocytes antigen 


© UCLES 2020 0610/21/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**20** What is the approximate percentage of oxygen contained in the air breathed out of the lungs? 

 A 0% B 4% C 16% D 20% 

**21** The diagram shows an experiment to investigate the respiration of yeast. Oil prevents oxygen entering the glucose and yeast suspension. 

 delivery tube 

 limewater 

 bubble of gas 

 thin layer of oil 

 glucose and yeast suspension 

 If no oxygen is present in the glucose and yeast suspension, what will occur? 

 A Ethanol will be produced and the limewater will stay clear. 

 B Ethanol will be produced and the limewater will go cloudy. 

 C Lactic acid will be produced and the limewater will stay clear. 

 D Lactic acid will be produced and the limewater will go cloudy. 

**22** Which row correctly completes the balanced equation for aerobic respiration? 

 X + 6O 2 → 6CO 2 + Y 

### X Y 

### A 6C 6 H 12 O 6 H 2 O 

### B C 6 H 12 O 6 6H 2 O 

### C 6H 2 O C 6 H 12 O 6 

### D C 6 H 10 O 6 6H 2 O 

**23** In healthy people, which substance is completely reabsorbed into the blood from the kidney tubules? 

 A glucose 

 B salts 

 C urea 

 D water 


© UCLES 2020 0610/21/M/J/20 

**24** The diagram shows a synapse. 

### W 

### Y X 

### Z 

 nerve ending of neurone 1 

 membrane of neurone 2 

 What are the labelled parts? 

### W X Y Z 

 A synaptic cleft neurotransmitter vesicle receptor 

 B synaptic cleft receptor vesicle neurotransmitter 

 C vesicle neurotransmitter synaptic cleft receptor 

 D vesicle receptor synaptic cleft neurotransmitter 

**25** Which row shows the actions needed for the eye to focus on a distant object? 

 ciliary muscles 

 suspensory ligaments lens becomes 

 A contract slacken thicker 

 B relax slacken thicker 

 C contract tighten thinner 

 D relax tighten thinner 

**26** The liver and the pancreas work together to control the concentration of glucose in the blood. 

 Which statement is correct? 

 A The liver converts the small molecule glucose to the large molecule glucagon. 

 B The liver releases the hormone insulin when blood glucose levels are too high. 

 C The pancreas does not respond to an increase in blood glucose levels. 

 D The pancreas responds to a fall in blood glucose by increasing the release of the hormone glucagon. 


© UCLES 2020 0610/21/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**27** The statements are about the use of antibiotics. 

 1 using an antibiotic to prevent infection 

 2 using an antibiotic known to kill the bacteria causing an infection 

 3 using an antibiotic only when essential 

 4 using an antibiotic to treat a viral infection 

 Which practices will increase the chance of the development of antibiotic resistance in bacteria? 

 A 1, 2, 3 and 4 B 1 and 4 only C 2 and 3 only D 2 and 4 only 

**28** Which description of cross-pollination is correct? 

 A the transfer of pollen grains from the anther of one plant to the stigma on a different plant 

 B the transfer of pollen grains from the anther to the stigma on the same plant 

 C the transfer of pollen grains from the stigma of one plant to the anther on a different plant 

 D the transfer of pollen grains from the stigma to the anther on the same plant 

**29** The diagram shows a sperm cell. 

 Which part contains enzymes that digest the jelly coat of an egg cell? 

 A B C D 

**30** Which cell contains a haploid nucleus? 

 A neurone 

 B sperm cell 

 C skin cell 

 D red blood cell 


© UCLES 2020 0610/21/M/J/20 

**31** The diagram shows the chromosomes of four daughter cells produced by meiosis. 

 Which parent cell produced these cells? 

 A B C D 

**32** When damaged tissues are repaired cells undergo division by 

 A meiosis to produce genetically identical cells. 

 B meiosis to produce genetically different cells. 

 C mitosis to produce genetically identical cells. 

 D mitosis to produce genetically different cells. 

**33** The graph shows the masses of two different types of tomato. 

### 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240 

 number of tomatoes 

 mass / g 

 type 1 type 2 

 What can be concluded from the graph? 

 A Genes do not affect the mass of tomatoes. 

 B Type 1 tomatoes show continuous variation. 

 C Type 2 tomatoes are sometimes smaller than type 1 tomatoes. 

 D Type 2 tomatoes show discontinuous variation. 


© UCLES 2020 0610/21/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**34** Which adaptation may be present in a xerophyte? 

 A leaves with small surface area and large numbers of stomata 

 B little or no xylem tissue and leaves with large surface area 

 C stomatal hairs and rolled leaves 

 D thin or no cuticle and deep roots 

**35** The diagram shows a food chain in a rock pool. 

 seaweed → whelks → crabs → seagulls 

 What will happen if the number of secondary consumers increases? 

 There will be 

 A fewer crabs. 

 B fewer seagulls. 

 C fewer whelks. 

 D less seaweed. 

**36** What is defined as ‘all of the populations of different species in an ecosystem’? 

 A community 

 B environment 

 C habitat 

 D trophic level 

**37** What is the role of anaerobic respiration in bread-making? 

 A to produce alcohol to flavour the bread 

 B to produce gas to make the bread rise 

 C to release enough energy to bake the bread 

 D to release enough lactic acid to kill the yeast 

**38** A crop plant has been genetically modified to make it resistant to herbicides. 

 Which is a possible disadvantage of introducing this new crop plant? 

 A Loss of weeds reduces competition. 

 B Some weeds might become resistant to the herbicide. 

 C The crop plant is unharmed and produces a higher yield. 

 D The new gene will appear in new generations of the crop. 


© UCLES 2020 0610/21/M/J/20 

**39** Which process in the nitrogen cycle is involved in the breakdown of amino acids in living organisms? 

 A deamination 

 B decomposition 

 C denitrification 

 D digestion 

**40** When a river is polluted by fertiliser, the following processes may occur. 

 1 increased aerobic respiration of decomposers 

 2 increased growth of producers 

 3 decreased oxygen concentration in the water 

 What is the correct sequence for these processes? 

 A 1 → 2 → 3 B 1 → 3 → 2 C 2 → 1 → 3 D 2 → 3 → 1 


© UCLES 2020 0610/21/M/J/20 

### BLANK PAGE 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2020 0610/21/M/J/20 

### BLANK PAGE 


