 This document has 8 pages. Blank pages are indicated. 

 DC (LK) 184712/3© UCLES 2020 [Turn over 

* 0 3 4 3 7 7 4 1 2 6 * 

# Cambridge IGCSE™ 

#### BIOLOGY 0610/53 

 Paper 5 Practical Test May/June 2020 CONFIDENTIAL INSTRUCTIONS This document gives details of how to prepare for and administer the practical exam. The information in this document and the identity of any materials supplied by Cambridge International are confidential and must NOT reach candidates either directly or indirectly. The supervisor must complete the report at the end of this document and return it with the scripts. INSTRUCTIONS ● If you have any queries regarding these confidential instructions, contact Cambridge International stating the centre number, the syllabus and component number and the nature of the query. email info@cambridgeinternational.org phone +44 1223 553554 


**©UCLES 2020 0610/53/CI/M/J/20** 

## General information about practical exams 

Centres must follow the guidance on science practical exams given in the _Cambridge Handbook_. 

### Safety 

Supervisors must follow national and local regulations relating to safety and first aid. Only those procedures described in the question paper should be attempted. Supervisors must inform candidates that materials and apparatus used in the exam should be treated with caution. Suitable eye protection should be used where necessary. The following hazard codes are used in these confidential instructions, where relevant: **C** corrosive **MH** moderate hazard **HH** health hazard **T** acutely toxic **F** flammable **O** oxidising **N** hazardous to the aquatic environment Hazard data sheets relating to substances used in this exam should be available from your chemical supplier. 

### Before the exam 

● The packets containing the question papers must **not** be opened before the exam. ● It is assumed that standard school laboratory facilities, as indicated in the _Guide to Planning Practical Science_ , will be available. ● Spare materials and apparatus for the tasks set must be available for candidates, if required. 

### During the exam 

● It must be made clear to candidates at the start of the exam that they may request spare materials and apparatus for the tasks set. ● Where specified, the supervisor **must** perform the experiments and record the results as instructed. This must be done **out of sight** of the candidates, using the same materials and apparatus as the candidates. ● Any assistance provided to candidates must be recorded in the supervisor’s report. ● If any materials or apparatus need to be replaced, for example, in the event of breakage or loss, this must be recorded in the supervisor’s report. 

### After the exam 

● The supervisor must complete a report for each practical session held and each laboratory used. ● Each packet of scripts returned to Cambridge International must contain the following items: ● the scripts of the candidates specified on the bar code label provided ● the supervisor’s results relevant to these candidates ● the supervisor’s reports relevant to these candidates ● seating plans for each practical session, referring to each candidate by candidate number ● the attendance register. 


**©UCLES 2020 0610/53/CI/M/J/20 [Turn over** 

## Specific information for this practical exam 

 During the exam, the supervisor (NOT the invigilator) must do the experiments in Questions 1 and 2 and record the results on a spare copy of the question paper, clearly labelled ‘supervisor’s results’. 

**Question 1** 

Each candidate should be provided with: 

 hazard materials and apparatus quantity percandidate green agar block on a white tile 1 transparent ruler with a mm scale 1 forceps 1 scalpel or sharp knife 1 large test-tubes 4 test-tube rack to support 4 large test-tubes 1 1 mol dm –3^ hydrochloric acid in a beaker labelled HC l 30 cm 3 distilled water in a beaker labelled water 30 cm 3 permanent marker pen 1 stop-clock 1 1 cm 3 syringe 1 5 cm^3 syringe 2 hand lens 1 gloves 1 pair suitable eye protection 1 paper towels 4 


**©UCLES 2020 0610/53/CI/M/J/20** 

**Question 2** 

Each candidate should be provided with: 

 hazard materials and apparatus quantity percandidate one bean in a Petri dish 1 iodine solution 20 cm 3 spatula or small spoon 1 gloves 1 pair suitable eye protection 1 transparent ruler with a mm scale 1 

**Preparation of materials** 

_Green agar block_ 

Sprinkle 1.5 g of agar onto 100 cm 3 of distilled water. Mix the agar and distilled water while heating in a water-bath at approximately 95 °C in a suitable container. When the agar is completely dissolved add 1 cm^3 of universal indicator to obtain a green or blue-green colour. If the agar is red or yellow a few drops of 1.0 mol dm –3^ NaOH (sodium hydroxide) **[C]** can be added to the dissolved agar to obtain a green colour. 

Pour the hot agar into a flat tray to a depth of just over 1 cm and allow to cool until set. 

Cut the set agar into 30 mm × 30 mm × 10 mm blocks. Place each block on a white tile and cover it with a damp paper towel until required. 

The agar may be prepared the day before the exam and stored in a refrigerator. The agar blocks should be presented to candidates at room temperature. 

_Bean_ 

This can be any leguminous bean such as soya, cannellini or chickpea (or suitable local alternative). The beans can be fresh, canned or dried. 

Dried beans should be soaked overnight in distilled water at room temperature. 

Canned beans should be rinsed before presenting to candidates. 

The bean should be supplied to candidates in a Petri dish. 

_Iodine solution_ 

This can be commercially prepared and should be suitable for use in food tests. It should be given to candidates in a dropper bottle labelled **iodine solution**. 


**©UCLES 2020 0610/53/CI/M/J/20 [Turn over** 

#### BLANK PAGE 


**©UCLES 2020 0610/53/CI/M/J/20** 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeAssessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University ofCambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. 

#### BLANK PAGE 


**©UCLES 2020 0610/53/CI/M/J/20 [Turn over** 

## Supervisor’s report 

Syllabus and component number _/_ 

Centre number 

Centre name ............................................................................................................................................ 

Time of the practical session ................................................................................................................... 

Laboratory name/number ........................................................................................................................ 

**Give details of any difficulties experienced by the centre or by candidates (include the relevant candidate names and candidate numbers).** 

You must include: 

 ● any difficulties experienced by the centre in the preparation of materials ● any difficulties experienced by candidates, e.g. due to faulty materials or apparatus ● any specific assistance given to candidates. 


**©UCLES 2020 0610/53/CI/M/J/20** 

**Declaration** 1 Each packet that I am returning to Cambridge International contains the following items: the scripts of the candidates specified on the bar code label provided the supervisor’s results relevant to these candidates the supervisor’s reports relevant to these candidates seating plans for each practical session, referring to each candidate by candidate number the attendance register 2 Where the practical exam has taken place in more than one practical session, I have clearly labelled the supervisor’s results, supervisor’s reports and seating plans with the time and laboratory name/number for each practical session. 3 I have included details of difficulties relating to each practical session experienced by the centre or by candidates. 4 I have reported any other adverse circumstances affecting candidates, e.g. illness, bereavement or temporary injury, directly to Cambridge International on a _special consideration form_. 

Signed ...................................................................................................... (supervisor) 

Name (in block capitals) ........................................................................... 


