 This document has 16 pages. Blank pages are indicated. 

 IB20 06_0610_12/4RP 

© UCLES 2020 (^) **[Turn over** 

## *4343563270* 

# Cambridge IGCSE 

## ™ 

### BIOLOGY 0610/12 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) May/June 2020 45 minutes 

 You must answer on the multiple choice answer sheet. 

 You will need: Multiple choice answer sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 INSTRUCTIONS 

- There are **forty** questions on this paper. Answer **all** questions. 

- For each question there are four possible answers **A** , **B** , **C** and **D**. Choose the **one** you consider correct     and record your choice in soft pencil on the multiple choice answer sheet. 

- Follow the instructions on the multiple choice answer sheet. 

- Write in soft pencil. 

- Write your name, centre number and candidate number on the multiple choice answer sheet in the     spaces provided unless this has been done for you. 

- Do **not** use correction fluid. 

- Do **not** write on any bar codes. 

- You may use a calculator. 

 INFORMATION 

- The total mark for this paper is 40. 

- Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. 

- Any rough working should be done on this question paper. 


© UCLES 2020 0610/12/M/J/20 

**1** The diagram shows what happened in an experiment with plant seedlings. 

 start 

 light 

 next day 

 light 

 Which characteristic of living things made the seedlings grow towards the light? 

 A excretion 

 B nutrition 

 C respiration 

 D sensitivity 

**2** A rat has the scientific name _Rattus rattus_. 

 What do the two parts of this name refer to? 

 A genus and species 

 B kingdom and genus 

 C kingdom and species 

 D variety and genus 

**3** Which list contains **only** arthropods? 

 A amphibians, insects, myriapods 

 B arachnids, crustaceans, myriapods 

 C crustaceans, insects, fish 

 D insects, myriapods, reptiles 


© UCLES 2020 0610/12/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**4** The diagram shows a plant cell. 

 A biologist wants to find out the number of chromosomes it contains. 

 Which labelled part should be examined more closely? 

### A 

### B 

### C 

### D 

**5** What are leaves examples of? 

 A cells 

 B organs 

 C organ systems 

 D tissues 

**6** Which diagram shows the appearance of a plant cell several minutes after it has been placed in a concentrated solution of sugar? 

 A B 

### C D 


© UCLES 2020 0610/12/M/J/20 

**7** Uncooked pieces of potato of identical size were placed in different liquids for one hour and then measured. 

 Which liquid will cause a decrease in the size of the piece of potato? 

 A pure water 

 B sugar solution less concentrated than the potato cell contents 

 C sugar solution more concentrated than the potato cell contents 

 D sugar solution with the same concentration as the potato cell contents 

**8** Which food-testing solution shows a positive result when it turns from blue to purple? 

 A Benedict’s solution 

 B biuret solution 

 C ethanol 

 D iodine solution 

**9** The diagram shows the four types of human tooth. 

 1 2 3 4 

 incisor canine premolar molar 

 Which teeth are used for grinding food? 

 A 1 and 2 B 2 and 3 C 3 and 4 D 4 and 1 


© UCLES 2020 0610/12/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**10** The diagram shows a plant cell. 

 In which part of the cell does photosynthesis occur? 

### A 

### B 

### C 

### D 

**11** Which substance found in a healthy diet helps to prevent constipation? 

 A fat 

 B fibre 

 C minerals 

 D vitamins 

**12** The graph shows the effect of pH on the activity of an enzyme. 

 enzyme activity 

### 1 3 5 7 

 pH 

### 9 11 

 In which part of the alimentary canal would this enzyme be most active? 

 A large intestine 

 B mouth 

 C small intestine 

 D stomach 


© UCLES 2020 0610/12/M/J/20 

**13** After passing through the root hair cells of a plant, what is the next tissue through which water passes? 

 A cortex 

 B epidermis 

 C mesophyll 

 D xylem 

**14** From which part of a leaf does most water evaporate during transpiration? 

 A the cuticle 

 B the guard cells 

 C the spongy mesophyll cells 

 D the xylem vessels 

**15** Which blood vessel carries blood to the muscle of the heart? 

 A coronary artery 

 B pulmonary artery 

 C renal vein 

 D vena cava 


© UCLES 2020 0610/12/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**16** The diagram shows the human heart and main blood vessels. 

 lungs 

 rest of body 

### X 

 What is the blood vessel labelled X? 

 A aorta 

 B pulmonary artery 

 C pulmonary vein 

 D vena cava 

**17** What is a chemical barrier to pathogens? 

 A nose hairs 

 B skin 

 C stomach acid 

 D white blood cells 

**18** What is the site of gas exchange in humans? 

 A nose 

 B alveoli 

 C bronchus 

 D trachea 


© UCLES 2020 0610/12/M/J/20 

**19** The substances listed are associated with aerobic respiration. 

 1 carbon dioxide 

 2 glucose 

 3 oxygen 

 4 water 

 Which substances are the products of aerobic respiration? 

 A 1 and 3 B 1 and 4 C 2 and 3 D 3 and 4 

**20** The diagram shows the breathing system. 

### 1 

### 2 

### 3 

 What are the labelled structures? 

### 1 2 3 

 A bronchus bronchiole trachea 

 B bronchiole bronchus trachea 

 C trachea bronchus bronchiole 

 D trachea diaphragm bronchus 


© UCLES 2020 0610/12/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**21** The diagram shows the human excretory system. 

 Which labelled structure is the ureter? 

 A 

### B 

### D 

### C 

**22** Which structure transfers information to the central nervous system? 

 A effector 

 B motor neurone 

 C relay neurone 

 D sensory neurone 

**23** Examples of responses to hormones are listed. 

 1 increased breathing rate 

 2 increased pulse rate 

 3 growth of body hair 

 4 widened pupils 

 Which responses are caused by the hormone adrenaline? 

 A 1, 2, 3 and 4 

 B 1, 2 and 4 only 

 C 2, 3 and 4 only 

 D 3 and 4 only 


© UCLES 2020 0610/12/M/J/20 

**24** Which part of the eye focuses light? 

 A cornea 

 B iris 

 C lens 

 D retina 

**25** The diagram shows a plant shoot growing towards the light. 

 light 

 Which response is shown by the shoot of the plant? 

 A gravitropism 

 B photosynthesis 

 C phototropism 

 D reflex 

**26** Which statement about antibiotic use in humans is correct? 

 A Different types of antibiotic are used to remove antibodies from the body. 

 B Antibiotics are injected in childhood to prevent diseases in adults. 

 C Antibiotics are used to treat diseases caused by viruses. 

 D Different types of antibiotic are used because bacteria can become resistant. 

**27** Which conditions are always required for the germination of seeds? 

 condition 

 light oxygen 

 suitable temperature water 

 A     key 

 B      = required 

 C      = not required 

 D     


© UCLES 2020 0610/12/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**28** Where do fertilisation and pollination occur in a flower? 

 fertilisation pollination 

 A carpel ovule 

 B ovary stigma 

 C stigma anther 

 D style carpel 

**29** When do the following stages occur in a typical human menstrual cycle? 

 bleeding ovulation 

 A days 13 – 14 days 6 – 25 

 B days 1 – 4 days 27 – 28 

 C days 6 – 25 days 1 – 4 

 D days 1 – 4 days 13 – 14 

**30** The graph shows the number of pregnancies in 4 groups of 100 women. Each group used a different method of contraception. 

 20 

### 10 

### 0 

 contraceptive pill 

 intra-uterine device (IUD) 

 diaphragm monitoring body temperature 

 number of pregnancies 

 The method of contraception which is the most effective is 

 A barrier. 

 B chemical. 

 C natural. 

 D surgical. 


© UCLES 2020 0610/12/M/J/20 

**31** The photograph shows a tiger. 

 Which visible adaptive feature makes the tiger a good predator? 

 A large teeth 

 B long whiskers 

 C small ears 

 D thick fur 

**32** Which statement about the human sex chromosomes is correct? 

 A Females have an X chromosome and a Y chromosome. 

 B Females have two Y chromosomes. 

 C Males and females have at least one X chromosome. 

 D Males and females have at least one Y chromosome. 


© UCLES 2020 0610/12/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**33** The diagram shows the inheritance of height in pea plants. 

 tall parent plant TT 

 tall offspring plant Tt 

 tall offspring plant Tt 

 dwarf parent plant tt 

 Which plants have a heterozygous genotype? 

 A both parent plants 

 B dwarf parent plant only 

 C both offspring plants 

 D tall parent plant only 

**34** The graph shows the masses of two different types of tomato. 

### 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240 

 number of tomatoes 

 mass / g 

 type 1 type 2 

 What can be concluded from the graph? 

 A Genes do not affect the mass of tomatoes. 

 B Type 1 tomatoes show continuous variation. 

 C Type 2 tomatoes are sometimes smaller than type 1 tomatoes. 

 D Type 2 tomatoes show discontinuous variation. 

**35** Which is an example of a population? 

 A all the animals and plants living in a lake 

 B all the different herbivores in a forest 

 C all the mahogany trees growing in a forest 

 D all the species of animals in Africa 


© UCLES 2020 0610/12/M/J/20 

**36** The diagram shows a food chain in a rock pool. 

 seaweed → whelks → crabs → seagulls 

 What will happen if the number of secondary consumers increases? 

 There will be 

 A fewer crabs. 

 B fewer seagulls. 

 C fewer whelks. 

 D less seaweed. 

**37** What is the role of anaerobic respiration in bread-making? 

 A to produce alcohol to flavour the bread 

 B to produce gas to make the bread rise 

 C to release enough energy to bake the bread 

 D to release enough lactic acid to kill the yeast 

**38** A crop plant has been genetically modified to make it resistant to herbicides. 

 Which is a possible disadvantage of introducing this new crop plant? 

 A Loss of weeds reduces competition. 

 B Some weeds might become resistant to the herbicide. 

 C The crop plant is unharmed and produces a higher yield. 

 D The new gene will appear in new generations of the crop. 


© UCLES 2020 0610/12/M/J/20 **[Turn over** 

**39** The diagram shows the results of a survey on the types of animals found along a stretch of river near to a factory. 

 rat-tailed maggot sludge worm bloodworm 

 mayfly nymph stonefly nymph 

 mayfly nymph stonefly nymph 

 shrimp caddisfly larva 

 bloodworm leech water louse snail 

 factory emptying pollutants into the water 

 direction of water flow 

 Which animal lives in the least polluted water? 

 A bloodworm 

 B caddisfly larva 

 C leech 

 D stonefly nymph 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2020 0610/12/M/J/20 

**40** The graph shows four areas of forest that were cut down and then replanted with trees in one part of the world between 1995 and 2015. 

 Which area of forest was used most sustainably? 

 area of forest replanted trees trees cut down 

 key 

### A B C D 


