 This document consists of 11 printed pages. 

© UCLES 2020 **[Turn over** 

# Cambridge IGCSE™ 

**BIOLOGY 0610/42** Paper 4 Theory (Extended) **May/June 2020** MARK SCHEME Maximum Mark: 80 

 Published 

Students did not sit exam papers in the June 2020 series due to the Covid-19 global pandemic. 

This mark scheme is published to support teachers and students and should be read together with the question paper. It shows the requirements of the exam. The answer column of the mark scheme shows the proposed basis on which Examiners would award marks for this exam. Where appropriate, this column also provides the most likely acceptable alternative responses expected from students. Examiners usually review the mark scheme after they have seen student responses and update the mark scheme if appropriate. In the June series, Examiners were unable to consider the acceptability of alternative responses, as there were no student responses to consider. 

Mark schemes should usually be read together with the Principal Examiner Report for Teachers. However, because students did not sit exam papers, there is no Principal Examiner Report for Teachers for the June 2020 series. 

Cambridge International will not enter into discussions about these mark schemes. 

Cambridge International is publishing the mark schemes for the June 2020 series for most Cambridge IGCSE™ and Cambridge International A & AS Level components, and some Cambridge O Level components. 


## 0610/42 

Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

May/June 2020 

 © UCLES 2020 

 Page 2 of 11 

 Generic Marking Principles 

 These general marking principles must be applied by all examiners when marking candidate answers. They should be applied alongside thespecific content of the mark scheme or generic level descriptors for a question. Each question paper and mark scheme will also comply with thesemarking principles.GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 1:Marks must be awarded in line with:^ •^ 

 the specific content of the mark scheme or the generic level descriptors for the question 

-^ 

 the specific skills defined in the mark scheme or in the generic level descriptors for the question 

-^ 

 the standard of response required by a candidate as exemplified by the standardisation scripts. GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 2:Marks awarded are always 

 whole marks 

 (not half marks, or other fractions). 

 GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 3:Marks must be awarded 

 positively 

## : 

## •^ 

 marks are awarded for correct/valid answers, as defined in the mark scheme. However, credit is given for valid answers which go beyond thescope of the syllabus and mark scheme, referring to your Team Leader as appropriate 

-^ 

 marks are awarded when candidates clearly demonstrate what they know and can do 

-^ 

 marks are not deducted for errors 

-^ 

 marks are not deducted for omissions 

-^ 

 answers should only be judged on the quality of spelling, punctuation and grammar when these features are specifically assessed by thequestion as indicated by the mark scheme. The meaning, however, should be unambiguous. GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 4:Rules must be applied consistently e.g. in situations where candidates have not followed instructions or in the application of generic leveldescriptors. 


Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

May/June 2020 

 Page 3 of 11 

 GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 5:Marks should be awarded using the full range of marks defined in the mark scheme for the question (however; the use of the full mark range maybe limited according to the quality of the candidate responses seen).GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 6:Marks awarded are based solely on the requirements as defined in the mark scheme. Marks should not be awarded with grade thresholds orgrade descriptors in mind. Science-Specific Marking Principles 1 

 Examiners should consider the context and scientific use of any keywords when awarding marks. Although keywords may be present, marksshould not be awarded if the keywords are used incorrectly. The examiner should not choose between contradictory statements given in the same question part, and credit should not be awarded for anycorrect statement that is contradicted within the same question part. Wrong science that is irrelevant to the question should be ignored. Although spellings do not have to be correct, spellings of syllabus terms must allow for clear and unambiguous separation from other syllabusterms with which they may be confused (e.g. ethane 

 /^ ethene, glucagon 

 /^ glycogen, refraction 

 /^ reflection). 

 The error carried forward (ecf) principle should be applied, where appropriate. If an incorrect answer is subsequently used in a scientificallycorrect way, the candidate should be awarded these subsequent marking points. Further guidance will be included in the mark scheme wherenecessary and any exceptions to this general principle will be noted. 


Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

May/June 2020 

 Page 4 of 11 

 ‘List rule’ guidance (see examples below)For questions that require 

 n^ 

 responses (e.g. State 

 two 

 reasons …): 

## •^ 

 The response should be read as continuous prose, even when numbered answer spaces are provided 

-^ 

 Any response marked 

 ignore 

 in the mark scheme should not count towards 

 n 

## •^ 

 Incorrect responses should not be awarded credit but will still count towards 

 n 

## •^ 

 Read the entire response to check for any responses that contradict those that would otherwise be credited. Credit should 

 not 

 be 

 awarded for any responses that are contradicted within the rest of the response. Where two responses contradict one another, thisshould be treated as a single incorrect response 

-^ 

 Non-contradictory responses after the first 

 n^ 

 responses may be ignored even if they include incorrect science. 

 Calculation specific guidanceCorrect answers to calculations should be given full credit even if there is no working or incorrect working, 

 unless 

 the question states ‘show 

 your working’.For questions in which the number of significant figures required is not stated, credit should be awarded for correct answers when rounded bythe examiner to the number of significant figures given in the mark scheme. This may not apply to measured values.For answers given in standard form, (e.g. 

 a^ 

## ×^10 

 n ) in which the convention of restricting the value of the coefficient ( 

 a ) to a value between 1 

 and 10 is not followed, credit may still be awarded if the answer can be converted to the answer given in the mark scheme.Unless a separate mark is given for a unit, a missing or incorrect unit will normally mean that the final calculation mark is not awarded.Exceptions to this general principle will be noted in the mark scheme. Guidance for chemical equationsMultiples 

 /^ fractions of coefficients used in chemical equations are acceptable unless stated otherwise in the mark scheme. 

 State symbols given in an equation should be ignored unless asked for in the question or stated otherwise in the mark scheme. 


## 0610/42 

Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

May/June 2020 

 © UCLES 2020 

 Page 5 of 11 

 mark scheme abbreviations •^ 

## ;^ 

 separates marking points 

## •^ 

## /^ 

 alternatives 

## •^ 

## R^ 

 reject 

## •^ 

## A^ 

 accept (for answers correctly cued by the question, or guidance for examiners) 

## •^ 

## I^ 

 ignore as irrelevant 

## •^ 

## AW 

 alternative wording (where responses vary more than usual) 

## •^ 

## AVP 

 alternative valid point 

## •^ 

 ora 

 or reverse argument 

## •^ 

 underline actual word given must be used by candidate (grammatical variants excepted) 


Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

May/June 2020 

 Page 6 of 11 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 1(a)(i) 

 (because it is made of) a group of tissues working together to perform specific functions 

## ;^ 

## 1 

 1(a)(ii) 

 brain 

## ;^ 

## 1 

 1(a)(iii) 

## A ( 

 thermo)receptor 

## ; 

## B^ 

 sweat gland 

## ; 

 F^ fatty tissue / fat cell(s) 

## ; 

## 3 

 1(a)(iv) 

 any three from: vasoconstriction (of arterioles 

## /^ E 

## )^ ; 

 shunt vessels 

## /^ D 

 , dilate 

 /^ widen 

## ; 

 less blood flow to skin (capillaries) 

## /^ F 

## ; 

 reduces heat loss from blood 

## ; 

## 3 

 1(b) 

 any three from: muscle contraction 

## ; 

 protein synthesis 

## ; 

 cell division 

## ; 

 active transport 

## ; 

 growth 

## ; 

 passage of nerve impulses 

## ; 

## 3 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 2(a) 

 embryo 

## ;^ 

## 1 

 2(b) 

 any two from: growth in all stages 

## ; 

 development 

 during all stages 

## ; 

 (more) increase in complexity in early stages 

## ; 

 (more) increased in size in later stages 

## ; 

## 2 


Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

May/June 2020 

 Page 7 of 11 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 2(c) 

 any four from: maintains temperature 

## ; 

 (mechanical) protection 

## ; 

 provides support (of the fetus) 

## ; 

 provides a sterile environment 

 /^ prevents infections 

## ; 

 allows movement (of the fetus) 

## ; 

 (movement) allows for development of bones and muscles 

## ; 

 ref. to swallowing (of fluid) 

## ; 

 lubrication 

## /^ AW 

## ; 

## AVP 

## ; 

## 4 

 2(d)(i) 

 pulmonary (artery) 

## ;^ 

## 1 

 2(d)(ii) 

 carbon dioxide 

 /^ urea 

## /^ A 

## VP 

## ;^ 

## 1 

 2(d)(iii) 

 diffusion 

## ;^ 

## 1 

 2(e)(i) 

## 0.005 

 (mm) 

## ;^ 

## 1 

 2(e)(ii) 

## 130 

## 000 

## ;;^ 

## 2 

 2(e)(iii) 

 nicotine, drug X, rubella virus 

## ;^ 

## 1 

 2(f)(i) 

## A^ 

 sensory neurone 

## ; 

## B^ 

 vesicle 

## ; 

## C^ 

 synapse 

 /^ synaptic cleft 

## ; 

## D^ 

 receptor 

 molecules 

## ; 

## 4 

 2(f)(ii) 

 any three from: drug 

## X^ 

 blocks, 

## D 

 /^ receptor (molecules) 

## ; 

 neurotransmitters are not able to bind to, 

## D 

 /^ receptor (molecules) 

## ; 

 drug 

## X^ 

 is similar in shape to neurotransmitter 

 /^ complementary to shape of receptor (molecule) 

## ; 

 drug 

## X^ 

 stops, impulse/electrical signal, being transmitted in relay neurone 

## ; 

 (so) less 

 /^ no, pain felt with drug 

## X ; 

## 3 


Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

May/June 2020 

 Page 8 of 11 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 2(g) 

 any two from: (contaminated) blood transfusion 

## ; 

 sexual fluids 

## ; 

 breast feeding 

## ; 

 blood to blood contact 

## ; 

## AVP 

## ;; 

## 2 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 3(a) 

 fur colouring camouflaged so that not seen by prey (when stalking) 

 /^ reflecting heat 

## /^ AW 

## ; 

 streamlined body shape improved ability to run fast 

 /^ reduced air resistance 

## /^ AW 

## /^ AVP 

## ; 

## 2 

 3(b)(i) 

 transmission of genetic information from generation to generation 

## ;^ 

## 1 

 3(b)(ii) 

 two of the same letter both lower case 

## ;^ 

## 1 

 3(b)(iii) 

## 0.25 

## /^ 25% 

(^1) / 4 

## ;^ 

## 1 

 3(b)(iv) 

 any two from: perform a test cross 

## ; 

 by breeding with, homozygous recessive 

 /^ king cheetah 

## ; 

 if any of the offspring of the test cross are king cheetahs it confirms 17 is heterozygous 

## ; 

 DNA testing 

## ; 

## 2 

 3(b)(v) 

 any one from: compare, morphology 

 /^ anatomy 

## ; 

 compare, DNA 

 /^ amino acid, sequences 

## ; 

## 1 


Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

May/June 2020 

 Page 9 of 11 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 3(c)(i) 

 any three from: hunting 

 /^ poaching 

## ; 

 disease 

## ; 

 lack of, food 

 /^ prey 

## ; 

 loss of (natural) habitat 

 /^ urbanization 

## ; 

 pollution 

 /^ poisoned carcasses 

## ; 

 inbreeding 

## /^ AW 

## ; 

 climate change 

## ; 

## AVP 

## ; 

## 3 

 3(c)(ii) 

 any three from: captive breeding programmes 

## ; 

 local cooperation 

 /^ education (of farmer 

 /^ land users) 

## ; 

 national parks 

 /^ conservation areas 

 /^ protect habitats 

## ; 

 legislation 

 /^ public pressure, against hunting 

## ; 

 monitor numbers 

## ; 

## AVP 

## ; 

## 3 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 4(a) 

 to increase crop, yield 

 /^ production 

## ; 

 to reduce competition with weeds 

## ; 

## AVP 

## ; 

## 2 

 4(b)(i) 

 concentration of both herbicides decreased (with time) 

 /^ described 

## ; 

## A^ 

 higher concentration than 

## B 

 (throughout) 

## ; 

## B^ 

 reached zero concentration before 

## A 

## ; 

 comparative data quote with units stated 

## ; 

## A^ 

 steeper than 

## B 

 initially 

## ; 

## 3 


Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

May/June 2020 

 Page 10 of 11 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 4(b)(ii) 

 kills, water plants 

 /^ algae 

## ; 

 lack of, producers 

 /^ food for herbivores 

## ; 

 bioaccumulation 

 /^ described 

## ; 

 reduced biodiversity 

## ; 

 (lack of roots causes) erosion 

 /^ silting 

 /^ flooding 

## ; 

## AVP 

## ;; 

## 4 

 4(c)(i) 

 network 

 /^ branched, veins 

## ; 

 broad 

 (leaves) 

## ; 

 petiole 

## ; 

## AVP 

## ; 

## 2 

 4(c)(ii) 

 auxin 

## ;^ 

## 1 

 4(c)(iii) 

 any three from: no chlorophyll synthesis 

## ; 

 cannot trap sunlight 

## ; 

 cannot photosynthesise 

## ; 

## AVP 

## ; 

## 3 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 5(a)(i) 

 Geospiza 

## ;^ 

## 1 

 5(a)(ii) 

 any five from: natural selection 

## ; 

 variation (in beak shapes) 

## ; 

 mutation 

 /^ description 

## ; 

 those birds with, selective advantage 

 /^ unique beak shape, more likely to find food and survive 

## ; 

 the birds that survive reproduce 

## ; 

 pass on their alleles 

## ; 

 continues over many generations 

## ; 

## AVP 

## ; 

## 5 


Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

May/June 2020 

 Page 11 of 11 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 6(a)(i) 

 one mark per correct row 

## ;;;;; 

 function 

 name of structure 

 letter from Fig. 6.1 

 provides support to the stem 

 xylem 

## L 

 protects flower bud 

 sepal 

## G 

 produces glucose 

 leaf 

## H 

 produces pollen 

 anther 

## B 

 delivers male nuclei to the site of fertilisation 

 pollen tube 

## D 

## 5 

 6(a)(ii) 

## B^ / 

## D^ 

## /^ F ; 

## 1 

 6(a)(iii) 

 translocation 

## ;^ 

## 1 

 6(a)(iv) 

## H ; 

## 1 

 6(b)(i) 

 nitrate (ions) 

## ;^ 

## 1 

 6(b)(ii) 

 ribosomes 

 /^ (rough) endoplasmic reticulum 

## ;^ 

## 1 

 6(b)(iii) 

 enzymes 

## ;^ 

## 1 


