 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS  0606/12 Paper1 May/June 2015  2 hours CandidatesanswerontheQuestionPaper. AdditionalMaterials: Electroniccalculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 WriteyourCentrenumber,candidatenumberandnameonalltheworkyouhandin. Writeindarkblueorblackpen. YoumayuseanHBpencilforanydiagramsorgraphs. Donotusestaples,paperclips,glueorcorrectionfluid. DO NOT WRITEINANYBARCODES. 

 Answer all thequestions. Givenon-exactnumericalanswerscorrectto3significantfigures,or1decimalplaceinthecaseof anglesindegrees,unlessadifferentlevelofaccuracyisspecifiedinthequestion. Theuseofanelectroniccalculatorisexpected,whereappropriate. Youareremindedoftheneedforclearpresentationinyouranswers. 

 Attheendoftheexamination,fastenallyourworksecurelytogether. Thenumberofmarksisgiveninbrackets[ ]attheendofeachquestionorpartquestion. Thetotalnumberofmarksforthispaperis80. 

 Thisdocumentconsistsof 16 printedpages. 

 DC(CW/JG)91463/2 ©UCLES2015 [Turn over 

 Cambridge International Examinations CambridgeInternationalGeneralCertificateofSecondaryEducation 

* 9 9 3 7 8 4 8 4 1 4 * 


© UCLES 2015 0606/12/M/J/15 

 Mathematical Formulae 

### 1. ALGEBRA 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

 x 

 b b ac a 

 = 

 − 2 − 4 2 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( _n_ 

# 1 ) a 

_n_ –1 (^) _b_ + 

# ( 

 n 

# 2 ) a 

_n_ –2 (^) _b_ (^2) + … + 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) a 

_n_ – _r_ (^) _br_ (^) + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( _n_ 

# r ) =^ 

 n! ( n – r )! r! 

### 2. TRIGONOMETRY 

_Identities_ 

 sin 2 A + cos^2 A = 1 

 sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A 

 cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC_ 

 a sin A =^ 

 b sin B =^ 

 c sin C 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

 ∆ = 

### 1 

 2 bc^ sin^ A 


© UCLES 2015 0606/12/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

**1** Given that the graph of _y_ = ( 2 _k_ + 5 ) _x_^2 + _kx_ + 1 does not meet the _x_ -axis, find the possible values of _k_. [4] 

**2** Show that cosec 

tan cot (^) sec _i i_ + _i_ (^) = _i_. [4] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/12/M/J/15 

**3** Find the inverse of the matrix 

### 4 

### 5 

### 2 

### 3 

### J 

### L 

### KK 

### N 

### P 

 OO and hence solve the simultaneous equations 

 4 x + 2 y 8 = 0 , 5 x + 3 y 9 = 0. [5] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/12/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

### 4 

### 1.7 

 rad 2.4 rad 

### A 

### C 

### B 

 12 cm 

### O 

 The diagram shows a circle, centre O , radius 12 cm. The points A , B and C lie on the circumference of this circle such that angle AOB is 1.7 radians and angle AOC is 2.4 radians. 

 (i) Find the area of the shaded region. [4] 

 (ii) Find the perimeter of the shaded region. [5] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/12/M/J/15 

**5 (a)** A security code is to be chosen using 6 of the following: 

- the letters A, B and C 

- the numbers 2, 3 and 5 

- the symbols * and $. None of the above may be used more than once. Find the number of different security codes that may be chosen if 

 (i) there are no restrictions, [1] 

 (ii) the security code starts with a letter and finishes with a symbol, [2] 

 (iii) the two symbols are next to each other in the security code. [3] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/12/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

 (b) Two teams, each of 4 students, are to be selected from a class of 8 boys and 6 girls. Find the number of different ways the two teams may be selected if 

 (i) there are no restrictions, [2] 

 (ii) one team is to contain boys only and the other team is to contain girls only. [2] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/12/M/J/15 

**6** A particle moves in a straight line such that its displacement, _x_ m, from a fixed point _O_ after _t_ s, is given by _x_ = 10 ln^ _t_^^2 + 4 h^ 4 _t_. 

 (i) Find the initial displacement of the particle from O. [1] 

 (ii) Find the values of t when the particle is instantaneously at rest. [4] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/12/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

 (iii) Find the value of t when the acceleration of the particle is zero. [5] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/12/M/J/15 

### 7 

### A 

### X 

### D C 

 7 a 

4 **a** (^) _B_ **b** In the diagram _AB_ = 4 **a** , _BC_ = **b** and _DC_ = 7 **a**. The lines _AC_ and _DB_ intersect at the point _X_. Find, in terms of **a** and **b** , **(i)** _DA_ , [1] **(ii)** _DB_. [1] Given that _AX_ = _mAC_ , find, in terms of **a** , **b** and _m_ , **(iii)** _AX_ , [1] **(iv)** _DX_. [2] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/12/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

 Given that DX = nDB , 

 (v) find the value of m and of n. [4] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/12/M/J/15 

## 8 (i) Find y ^10e^2 x^^ + e -^2 x hd x. [2] 

 (ii) Hence find ( 10e x^ e x ) d x k 

_k_ (^) 2 2 + 

- 

## y in terms of the constant k. [2] 

 (iii) Given that ( 10 e x^ e x ) d x 60 k 

_k_ (^) 2 2 + =

- 

## y , show that 11 e 2 k^^ 11 e-^2 k + 120 = 0. [2] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/12/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

 (iv) Using a substitution of y = e 2 k or otherwise, find the value of k in the form a ln b , where a and b are constants. [3] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/12/M/J/15 

**9** A curve has equation _y_ = 4 _x_ + 3 cos 2 _x_. The normal to the curve at the point where _x_ = 4^ _r_ meets 

 the x and y -axes at the points A and B respectively. Find the exact area of the triangle AOB , where O is the origin. [8] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/12/M/J/15 **[Turn over** 

**10 (a)** Solve 2 cos 3 _x_ = sec 3 _x_ for 0 ° G _x_ G 120 °. [3] 

 (b) Solve 3 cosec 2 y + 5 cot y 5 = 0 for 0 ° G y G 360 °. [5] 

 Question 10(c) is printed on the next page. 


© UCLES 2015 0606/12/M/J/15 

 (c) Solve 2 sin z 3 

### 1 

 r + = 

### J 

### L 

### KK 

### N 

### P 

 OO for 0 G z G 2 r radians. [4] 

Permissiontoreproduceitemswherethird-partyownedmaterialprotectedbycopyrightisincludedhasbeensoughtandclearedwherepossible.Everyreasonable efforthasbeenmadebythepublisher(UCLES)totracecopyrightholders,butifanyitemsrequiringclearancehaveunwittinglybeenincluded,thepublisherwill bepleasedtomakeamendsattheearliestpossibleopportunity. 

Toavoidtheissueofdisclosureofanswer-relatedinformationtocandidates,allcopyrightacknowledgementsarereproducedonlineintheCambridgeInternational ExaminationsCopyrightAcknowledgementsBooklet.Thisisproducedforeachseriesofexaminationsandisfreelyavailabletodownloadatwww.cie.org.ukafter theliveexaminationseries. 

CambridgeInternationalExaminationsispartoftheCambridgeAssessmentGroup.CambridgeAssessmentisthebrandnameofUniversityofCambridgeLocal ExaminationsSyndicate(UCLES),whichisitselfadepartmentoftheUniversityofCambridge. 


