® IGCSE is the registered trademark of Cambridge International Examinations. 

 This document consists of 14 printed pages. 

© UCLES 2016 [Turn over 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

ECONOMICS 0455/23 

Paper 2 Structured Questions May/June 2016 

MARK SCHEME 

Maximum Mark: 90 

 Published 

This mark scheme is published as an aid to teachers and candidates, to indicate the requirements of the examination. It shows the basis on which Examiners were instructed to award marks. It does not indicate the details of the discussions that took place at an Examiners’ meeting before marking began, which would have considered the acceptability of alternative answers. 

Mark schemes should be read in conjunction with the question paper and the Principal Examiner Report for Teachers. 

Cambridge will not enter into discussions about these mark schemes. 

Cambridge is publishing the mark schemes for the May/June 2016 series for most Cambridge IGCSE®, Cambridge International A and AS Level components and some Cambridge O Level components. 


 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 0455 23 

1 (a) Using information from the extract, explain whether the average cost of building the largest container ships in China rose or fell between 2012 and 2013. [2] 

 Fell (1) total cost rising proportionally less than output / average cost fell from US$145m to $130m / fell by $15m (Answer must have $) [1] 

 (b) Explain what type of business organisation the extract suggests the two large South Korean shipbuilding firms are. [2] 

 Public limited company (1) has shareholders / listed on the stock exchange (1). 

 (c) Using information from the extract, explain two external costs that shipbuilding can cause. [4] 

- An external cost is a cost on third parties (1) the difference between social costs and     private costs (1). 

- Shipbuilding creates (noise) pollution (1) reducing the quality of life of people living     near shipyards / people need to spend money on soundproofing (1). 

- Traffic congestion (1) which increases drivers’ journey times (1). 

 (d) Calculate how many more people were unemployed in China than South Korea in 

2013. [3] 

- 22.96m (3) but accept 23m. Correct workings (2). 

- Unemployment in China is 24m (1). Unemployment in South Korea is 1.04m (1). 

 (e) Analyse two reasons, referred to in the extract, why shipbuilding is declining in the UK. [4] 

- Failure to respond to change (1) e.g. not picking up on changes in demand / not     introducing new technology (1). 

- Other governments providing subsidies (1) this will reduce their costs of production (1). 

 (f) Discuss whether a merger between two shipbuilding firms will improve the quality of ships built. [5] 

 Up to 3 marks for why it might: 

- The merged firm might be able to take advantage of economies of scale (1) lower     average cost of production (1) higher profits (1) more funds to spend on research and     development / afford better resources (1) share ideas / increase innovation (1)     eliminates wasteful duplication (1) 

 Up to 3 marks for why it might not: 

- Reduction in competitive pressure (1) firms may not spend money on research and     development (1) consumers have less choice (1). 

- Internal diseconomies of scale may be experienced (1) e.g. may be a lack of     communication between workers and managers (1). 


 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 0455 23 

(g) Using information from the extract, explain whether the value of the South Korean won was expected to rise or fall in 2014. [4] 

- Expected to rise (1). The value rose in 2013 as fewer won had to be exchanged for a     dollar / the won could be exchanged for a greater number of dollars (1) and this trend     is set to continue (1) it is more likely to do so if South Korea’s ships are becoming     more price competitive (1) and if South Korea’s economic growth rate increases (1). 

- The value of exchange rates is influenced by changes in net exports (1) and economic     prospects (1) 

(h) Discuss whether a government should protect its country’s shipbuilding industry. [6] 

 Up to 4 marks for why it should: 

- Shipbuilding may be an infant industry (1) not yet able to take advantage of economies     of scale (1) average cost of production may be high (1). 

- To protect employment (1) saving on unemployment benefits (1) shipbuilding may be     declining (1). 

- Shipbuilding may be considered to be a strategic industry (1) the government may be     reluctant to rely on ships built in other countries (1). 

- Shipbuilding may be a major contributor to GDP / employment (1) protecting     shipbuilding may also protect other (supplier) industries (1) 

- May improve the current account position (1) reducing expenditure on imports (1). 

 Up to 4 marks for why it should not: 

- It may not be making good use of resources / it may be inefficient / there is an     opportunity cost (1) the economy’s output may be lower (1) prices may be higher (1). 

- It may result in retaliation (1) other countries may impose trade restrictions on the     country’s products (1) e.g. tariffs may be imposed (1) 

- The reduction in competition (1) may reduce the quality of the ships built (1). 

- Reward but do not expect comparative advantage argument (up to 2) 

 Note: no reference to shipbuilding – 4 marks maximum 


 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 0455 23 

2 (a) Giving an example, define ‘complements’. [2] 

 Two products that are used / consumed together (1) as demand for one product increases, demand for the other product increases (1) e.g. laptops and printers or coffee and milk (1). 

 (b) Explain two reasons why demand for a product may be price-inelastic. (4) 

- The product may lack substitutes (1) people may not be able to switch easily to and     from rival producers (1) example such as water (1) 

- Demand for the product may be addictive (1) people may find it difficult to reduce     demand significantly for e.g. cigarettes, should the price rise (1). 

- The product may take up only a small part of income (1) so a price change will not     have a significant impact on the amount people have to pay (1). 

- The purchase of the product cannot be delayed (1) e.g. damaged roof may have to be     repaired quickly even if price rises (1). 

 (c) Using a demand and supply diagram, analyse the effect of a rise in the price of coffee on the market for tea. [6] 

 Up to 4 marks for the diagram: 

- axes correctly labelled – price and quantity or P and Q (1) 

- demand and supply curves correctly labelled (1) 

- demand curve shifted to the right (1) 

- correct equilibriums identified either by lines drawn to both axes or equilibrium points     identified e.g. E and E1 (1) 

 Up to 2 marks for written comments: 

- tea and coffee are substitutes (1) 

- if the price of a substitute / coffee rises, consumers will switch to rival products / tea (1) 

- the higher demand for tea will raise the price of tea (1). 

 D 

 D 

 S 

 S 

 P 

 Q Q 1 

 P 1 

 D 1 

 D 1 O 

 price 

 quantity 


 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 0455 23 

(d) Discuss whether improving the quality of coffee that a country produces will result in a surplus on the current account of its balance of payments. [8] 

 Up to 5 marks for why it might: 

- The high quality coffee may be in high demand abroad (1) this may increase exports     (1) export revenue will increase (1) the trade in goods balance will improve (1). 

- The high quality coffee may be in high demand at home (1) this may reduce imports of     coffee (1) reducing import expenditure (1). 

 Up to 5 marks for why it might not: 

- The coffee may not be exported if demand is high at home (1) trade restrictions are     placed on the country’s exports of coffee (1) the quality may still be below that of other     countries (1) the price may be high (1). 

- Other countries may be improving the quality of their coffee (1) 

- Coffee may still be imported (1) due to differences in taste (1). 

- An increase in net exports (1) may not be sufficient to reduce a current account deficit /     produce a surplus (1). 

- Coffee is only one product and there may still be a trade in goods deficit (1) there are     other components of the current position e.g. trade in services (1) which may be in     deficit (1). 

- If the country has a strong / strengthening currency (1) exports of coffee will become     expensive / imports of coffee will become cheap (1) making the country’s coffee less     demanded (1) 


 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 0455 23 

3 (a) Identify two risks that entrepreneurs have to bear. [2] 

 1 mark for each of two risks identified e.g.: 

- a rival bringing out a better product 

- demand decreasing due to falling incomes 

- costs rising. 

- risk of failure / losses / bankruptcy 

 (b) Explain two reasons why firms may prefer to employ local managers rather than foreign managers. [4] 

- Local managers may be prepared to work for lower salaries (1) so reducing costs of     production (1). 

- Local managers may have local knowledge / training (1) for example, knowing local     tastes/local sources of supplies (1). 

- Local managers may require fewer fringe benefits (1) for example, subsidised     housing (1). 

- Local managers may communicate better with the workers (1) e.g. speak the same     language (1). 

 (c) Analyse why households and firms may borrow more during times of rapid economic growth. [6] 

- Households may borrow more because they are more optimistic about the future (1)     they may expect their income will continue to rise (1) which will make it easier to repay     loans (1). 

- Unemployment is likely to be lower (1) banks are more likely to lend to those in work     (1) those in work may offer banks greater security for loans (1) and have more assets     (1) 

- Firms will be producing more (1) will borrow to expand production (1) will be more     confident in their ability to repay (1). 


 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 0455 23 

(d) Discuss whether the activities of trade unions are likely to increase or decrease a country’s economic growth rate. [8] 

 Up to 5 marks for why they are likely to increase it: 

- Trade unions may cut firms’ costs of production (1) by reducing the time and effort     involved in negotiating with workers (1) lower costs can increase profits (1) higher     profits can encourage expansion (1). 

- Trade unions may push up wages (1) boosting total (aggregate) demand in the     economy (1) 

- Trade unions may help with training and education systems (1) such schemes may     raise productivity (1) higher productivity can cut costs of production (1) and increase     productive potential (1). 

- By promoting workers’ rights (1) trade unions may increase the motivation of     workers / workers may gain more job satisfaction (1) which will raise productivity (1). 

 Up to 5 marks for why they are likely to decrease it: 

- Trade unions may push up wages (1) higher wages will increase firms’ costs of     production (1) this may encourage them to cut production (1). 

- Trade unions may engage in industrial action (1) e.g. strikes (1) this will disrupt     production (1) sales may be lost (1). 

- The presence of trade unions may discourage MNCs setting up in the country (1)     MNCs contribute to economic growth (1). 


 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 0455 23 

4 (a) Identify two influences on a country’s birth rate. [2] 

 1 mark each for two relevant influences identified e.g.: 

- education levels 

- income levels / ability to afford children 

- availability of contraceptives / family planning 

- proportion of women in the labour force / proportion of child-bearing age 

- infant mortality rate 

- state support for families. 

- availability of healthcare / maternity facilities 

- availability of maternity/paternity leave 

- availability of child benefit payments 

 (b) Explain two measures of comparative living standards. [4] 

- GDP per head (1) GDP divided by population/a measure based on income (1). 

- The Human Development Index (1) takes into account income, education and life     expectancy (1). 

- Individual indicators e.g. number of doctors per head of the population (1) more     doctors per head of the population may indicate better health standards (1). 

- Accept but do not expect other measures e.g.: 

- The Multidimensional Poverty Index (1) a survey of households including e.g. lack     of sanitation and access to clean water (1). 

 (c) Analyse the social benefits of giving vaccinations. [6] 

- Social benefits are private benefits plus external benefits (1) the total benefits to     society (1) 

- Vaccinations provide private benefits (1) reduce the chances of people developing     illness (1) increase their quality of life (1). 

- Vaccinations provide private benefits as income to the pharmaceutical industry (1)     and employment / income to workers in the pharmaceutical industry (1) 

- Vaccinations provide external benefits (1) reduce the risk of the spread of disease     (1) reduce the burden on the healthcare system (1) increase output (1) avoids a fall     in the labour force (1) 

- Accept answers which consider the avoidance of external costs up to a maximum of 4. 


 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 0455 23 

(d) Discuss whether healthcare should be provided by the public sector or private sector. [8] 

 Up to 5 marks for why it should be provided by the public sector: 

- If left to market forces it will be under-consumed (1) people do not appreciate the full     benefits to themselves of healthcare (1). 

- Healthcare provides significant external benefits (1) a healthy labour force (1) will be     more productive (1). Healthcare is a basic service (1) which the poor may not be     able to afford (1). 

- Consumers may not be adequately informed about the cost of healthcare (1) may be     charged high prices by the private sector (1). 

- Profit motive of private sector (1) keeps prices higher (1) 

 Up to 5 marks for why it should be provided by the private sector: 

- The private sector will have a profit motive (1) to produce what consumers want/to be     more responsive to changes in consumer demand (1). 

- The private sector will have competition (1) an incentive to keep costs low (1) improve     quality (1) cut out unnecessary waste (1). 

- Some forms of medical treatment are cosmetic (1) more of a luxury/not a necessity (1). 

- Government expenditure on healthcare involves an opportunity cost (1) tax revenue     could be used for other purposes (1). 

- The public sector may be too bureaucratic / inefficient (1) 


 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 0455 23 

5 (a) Identify two reasons why people may keep some of their money in a savings account at a commercial bank. [2] 

 1 mark for each of two reasons identified: 

- to earn interest 

- to keep safe 

- to spend in the future. 

 (b) Explain the different goals that state-owned commercial banks and privately-owned commercial banks may have. [4] 

 Up to 2 marks for goals of state-owned commercial banks: 

- A state-owned commercial bank may be aiming to provide a reliable service (1)     ensure people’s savings are safe (1). 

- A state-owned commercial bank may be trying to promote government objectives (1)     promote economic growth (1) e.g. lending to new firms (1). 

- A state-owned commercial bank may seek to provide banking services to those who     private banks may be reluctant to have as customers (1) be more willing to lend to the     poor (1). 

 Up to 2 marks for goals of privately owned commercial banks: 

- A private sector may seek to maximise profits (1) to pay shareholders (1) by increasing     the gap between revenue and cost (1), 

- A private bank may seek to grow (1) to increase market power/share (1) experience     economies of scale (1). 

- A private bank may try to survive (1) during difficult financial times (1). 

- A private sector bank may engage in profit satisficing (1) keeping shareholders happy     whilst pursuing some other objectives (1). 

 (c) Analyse how the growth in the size of commercial banks may benefit their customers.[6] 

- Growth of commercial banks may enable them to take greater advantage of economies     of scale (1) example (1) lower average cost of production (1) this may result in lower     prices (1). 

- Growth of commercial banks may increase their profits (1) this may enable them to     spend more on research and development (1) innovate (1) improve quality of services     (1) provide a greater range of services (1). 

- Growth of commercial banks may reduce their chance of them going out of business (1)     possibly greater security for their customers’ savings (1). 


 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 0455 23 

(d) Discuss whether living standards are likely to be higher in a mixed economy or a market economy. [8] 

- A mixed economy has both a private and public sector/a market economy, in theory,     has just a private sector (1). 

 Up to 5 marks for why they may be higher in a mixed economy: 

- The government may protect vulnerable groups (1) e.g. provide pensions for the elderly (1). 

- The government may seek to achieve full employment (1) avoiding people having low     income due to being unemployed (1). 

- The government may provide health care/education/housing free to consumers (1)     ensuring everyone has access to essential products (1). 

- External costs may be reduced by government action (1) there may be less pollution (1). 

 Note: reward but do not expect: public goods will be provided. 

 Up to 5 marks for why they may be higher in a market economy: 

- People may have more choice (1) firms may provide a range of products (1). 

- There will be no rules and regulations (1) reducing what people can consume (1) and     what firms can produce (1). 

- Output/incomes may be high (1) quality may be high (1) due to profit motive (1) and     competition (1). 


 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 0455 23 

6 (a) What is meant by an inflation rate increasing? [2] 

 The price level increasing (1) by a greater percentage/higher rate (1). 

 (b) Explain two reasons why tax revenue may fall. [4] 

- Tax rates may be reduced (1) lowering e.g. VAT rates/income tax rates may be     reduced/in the short run reducing amount that can be earned (1). 

- Unemployment may increase (1) reducing income tax revenue/indirect tax revenue (1). 

- Firms’ profits may fall (1) lowering corporation tax revenue (1). 

- Population may decline (1) there will be fewer tax payers reducing revenue from all tax     payers (1). 

- Tax evasion may increase (1) people may e.g. not declare income earned (1). 

- Income may fall / output may fall (1) reducing income tax revenue (1). 

- Consumption may fall (1) reducing indirect tax / VAT / GST revenue (1) 

 (c) Analyse how a fall in unemployment may increase inflation. [6] 

- A fall in unemployment may increase incomes (1) this may increase consumer     spending (1) increasing total (aggregate) demand (1) causing demand-pull inflation (1). 

- A fall in unemployment may result in a shortage of workers (1) this may raise wages (1)     increasing firms’ costs of production (1) causing cost-push inflation (1). 

 (d) Discuss whether a government should spend more than it raises in taxation. [8] 

 Up to 5 marks for why it should: 

- If it wants to increase employment (1) increase economic growth (1) government     spending more than it raises in taxation/operating a budget deficit will raise total     demand (1) higher demand may encourage an increase in output (1) higher output     may increase economic growth (1) to produce more goods and services, firms may     employ more workers (1). 

 Up to 5 marks for why it should not: 

- If it wants to reduce inflation (1) reduce a current account deficit (1) the government     raising more in taxation than it is spending/operating a budget surplus will lower total     demand (1) 

- lower demand may reduce demand-pull inflation (1) lower demand may include lower     demand for imports (1) lower demand may encourage domestic firms to export more     (1). 

- In the long run a government is likely to want to match government spending and     taxation (1). 

- Interest which must be paid on a budget deficit (1) is a long term burden / a burden     for future generations (1) may lead to higher taxes in future (1) 


 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 0455 23 

7 (a) Define ‘absolute poverty’. [2] 

- A lack of access to basic necessities (1) e.g. food/clothing/housing (1) 

- Living on less than e.g. US$1.25 a day (1) 

 (b) Explain two different opportunity costs that may be involved in a person becoming a sole proprietor [4] 

- Opportunity cost is the (next) best alternative foregone (1). 

- A person may be giving up the opportunity to do a job (1) and so a wage (1). 

- A person may give up the opportunity to enter higher education (1) and so possibly     higher future earnings (1). 

- A person may give up the opportunity to be involved in another type of business     organisation (1) e.g. a public limited company (1). 

 (c) Analyse, using a production possibility curve, the effect of advances in technology. [6] 

 Up to 3 marks for the diagram: 

- axes correctly labelled in terms of two different products or types of products (1) 

- the curve or downward sloping line drawn to the axes (1) 

- the curve shifting out to the right (1). 

 Up to 3 marks for written comments: 

- advances in technology increase the quality of capital goods (1) 

- higher quality capital equipment increases productive capacity/the maximum quantity     of products that can be produced (1) 

- increased productive capacity results in (potential) economic growth (1) 

- may affect the output of the two products differently (1) slope may change (1). 

## B 

## A B 

## A 

## O 

 capital goods 

 consumer goods 


 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 0455 23 

(d) Discuss whether increased spending on education will always reduce absolute poverty [8] 

 Up to 5 marks for why it might: 

- Education may increase labour productivity (1) this may raise income (1) allowing     people to buy more basic goods and services (1). 

- Education may increase people’s skills and qualifications (1) this may reduce     unemployment (1) raising incomes (1). 

- Education may reduce the birth rate (1) reducing the dependency ratio (1). 

- Education spending creates jobs (1) e.g. teachers, school cleaners (1) 

 Up to 5 marks for why it might not: 

- Education may be of poor quality/be in inappropriate areas (1) and so may not     increase productivity (1) and so not raise employment and income (1). 

- The increased spending on education may be on a small proportion of the population     (1) the poor may not benefit (1). 

- The increased spending on education may involve an opportunity cost (1) spending on     healthcare may be reduced (1) spending on other areas may be more effective in     reducing poverty (1) e.g. housing provision (1) 

- Workers may be better educated (1) but there may still be unemployment if there is a     lack of demand in the economy (1). 


