 This document consists of 10 printed pages and 2 blank pages. 

 IB19 06_0455_12/3RP © UCLES 2019 [Turn over 

# *8190973957* 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## ECONOMICS 0455/12 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice May/June 2019 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are thirty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. 


© UCLES 2019 0455/12/M/J/19 

**1** A government wishes to increase agricultural output. It gives farmers the tools to irrigate the farmers’ fields. 

 Which factors of production are provided by the farmers? 

 A capital and enterprise 

 B enterprise and labour 

 C labour and land 

 D land and capital 

**2** The diagram shows a production possibility curve (PPC) for an economy that produces both capital goods and consumer goods. 

 At which point will the economy show the highest potential for sustained long run economic growth? 

 consumer goods 

 capital goods 

## O 

## D 

## C 

## B 

## A 

**3** In recent years more golf courses, which use large quantities of water, have opened in China. 

 What may be the opportunity cost of this? 

 A cost of water 

 B loss of farmland 

 C sales of golf equipment 

 D wages of golf course staff 

**4** Cuba is implementing free market reforms. 

 What is a likely advantage of this? 

 A a wider variety of goods and services produced 

 B greater equality between the different groups in society 

 C increased provision of public goods 

 D less consumption of goods with external costs 


© UCLES 2019 0455/12/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**5** An airline upgrades its services by providing bigger aircraft. The airline claims it will reduce catering waste and lower carbon (CO 2 ) emissions per passenger journey although fares may rise. 

 What is a private cost and an external benefit of this decision? 

 private cost external benefit 

 A bigger aircraft higher fares 

 B higher fares lower CO 2 

 C less catering waste bigger aircraft 

 D lower CO 2 less catering waste 

**6** What can be concluded from the demand curve for the product shown in the diagram? 

 price 

 quantity 

## 0 

 demand 

## 20 40 

 A Price increases will raise the producers’ revenue. 

 B Producers are unable to respond to a price rise. 

 C The product is one with many substitutes. 

 D There are 20 people able to buy the product. 

**7** A mobile (cell) phone operator increases the price of making calls on its network. After the price increase, the revenue of the mobile phone operator falls by 10%. 

 What is the price elasticity of demand (PED) for the mobile operator’s service? 

 A elastic 

 B inelastic 

 C perfectly elastic 

 D unit elastic 


© UCLES 2019 0455/12/M/J/19 

**8** Why does specialisation increase the productivity of employees? 

 A Average cost of production increases. 

 B Staff turnover is high. 

 C Time is saved by not moving between tasks. 

 D Workers lose interest in their job. 

**9** In recent years some central banks have reduced interest rates below 1% per year. 

 What is the purpose of this monetary policy? 

 A to discourage lending by the commercial banks 

 B to encourage investment to stimulate the economy 

 C to increase individual savings 

 D to reduce inflation 

**10** What is the **most** important factor that affects how much a family saves? 

 A the income of the family 

 B the level of taxation 

 C the rate of inflation 

 D the reliability of banks 


© UCLES 2019 0455/12/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**11** The table shows the change in real incomes for a number of occupations between 1985 and 2015. 

 occupation 

 change in real income % 

 doctors 153 

 lawyers 114 

 accountants 60 

 bricklayers 37 

 bus and coach drivers 19 

 fork-lift truck drivers –5 

 What can be concluded from the table? 

 A All occupations were better off in 2015 than in 1985. 

 B Fork-lift truck drivers earned the lowest wages in 2015. 

 C Doctors have earned more than lawyers since 1985. 

 D Professionals received higher percentage increases in income than manual workers. 

**12** What is the main difference between capital-intensive production and labour-intensive production? 

 A the market structure of the production process 

 B the output that the production process creates 

 C the resources on which the production relies 

 D the size of the firm that uses the production process 

**13** What is the definition of diseconomies of scale? 

 A the decrease in average revenue as output increases 

 B the decrease in fixed cost as output increases 

 C the increase in average total costs as output increases 

 D the increase in total costs as output increases 


© UCLES 2019 0455/12/M/J/19 

**14** The diagram shows the fixed costs, variable costs and total costs of a firm. 

 costs 

 output 

## O 

## W 

## X 

## Y 

## Z 

 Which distance represents the firm’s fixed costs? 

 A WX B WY C XY D XZ 

**15** An entrepreneur buys a workshop for $200 000 to make plastic boxes. In the first year of operation he spends $70 000 on materials, employs ten production workers paid by the amount produced (piece rate) at a total cost of $80 000 and buys two delivery vehicles for $10 000 each. 

 What are his total variable costs? 

 A $100 000 B $150 000 C $220 000 D $370 000 

**16** What is **most** likely to cause a rise in the rate of inflation in an economy? 

 A a fall in import prices 

 B a fall in wage rates 

 C a rise in the level of government spending 

 D a rise in the level of unemployment 

**17** The government increases taxation in order to fund an increase in spending on government training schemes. 

 Which policy combination would this involve? 

 A fiscal policy and monetary policy only 

 B fiscal policy and supply-side policy only 

 C monetary policy and supply-side policy only 

 D monetary policy, supply-side policy and fiscal policy 


© UCLES 2019 0455/12/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**18** The diagram shows the effect of the imposition of a tax on a product. 

## O 

 price 

 quantity 

## S 2 

## S 1 

## Q 2 Q 1 

## D 1 

U (^) V W X (^) Y Z Which area represents the part of the tax paid by consumers of the product? **A** U + V **B** U + V + W **C** U + V + X + Y **D** U + X **19** Why might a government decide to subsidise a high-cost steel industry? **A** if cheaper imports of steel are improving the balance of payments **B** if economic growth is increasing due to the success of other industries **C** if redundant steel workers can easily be retrained **D** if unemployment in steel producing areas is increasing **20** The table shows possible sequences between the rate of interest and other economic variables. Which sequence is the **most** likely? interest rate borrowing investment GDP **A** higher decrease increase increase **B** higher increase decrease decrease **C** lower decrease decrease decrease **D** lower increase increase increase 


© UCLES 2019 0455/12/M/J/19 

**21** Why is the Human Development Index (HDI) a better measure of living standards than GDP per head? 

 A It takes into account changes in output. 

 B It takes into account changes in population. 

 C It takes into account health and education data. 

 D It takes into account inflation. 

**22** What describes frictional unemployment? 

 A unemployment caused by a general fall in economic activity 

 B unemployment caused by the time of year 

 C unemployment caused by wages being too high 

 D unemployment caused by workers searching for jobs 

**23** In January 2016 the rate of inflation in a country changed from 3% to 2%. In March 2016 the rate of inflation was 4%. 

 What happened to the price level in January and March? 

 January March 

 A fell fell 

 B fell rose 

 C rose fell 

 D rose rose 

**24** What usually happens as a developing country becomes more developed? 

 A The average age of the population falls. 

 B The fertility rate declines. 

 C The infant mortality rate increases. 

 D The primary sector expands. 


© UCLES 2019 0455/12/M/J/19 **[Turn over** 

**25** Given the following information, which country is most likely to have the highest standard of living? 

 birth rate 

 death rate 

 life expectancy 

 infant mortality rate 

 A Bangladesh 27 10 58 93 

 B Bhutan 36 14 53 107 

 C Botswana 31 21 40 57 

 D Brunei 25 5 72 22 

**26** In a country the birth rate increased but the population decreased. 

 What could have happened to other factors to cause this? 

 A a fall in infant mortality but no change in the death rate 

 B a rise in net immigration but no change in the death rate 

 C no change in migration but the death rate rose 

 D the death rate fell with no change in migration 

**27** The US government decides to reduce the size of the quota on a good it buys from China. 

 What is likely to happen? 

 A The good will become cheaper in the US. 

 B The US balance of trade will worsen. 

 C The US government’s revenue will decline. 

 D There will be less of the good imported into the US. 

**28** The world demand for oil is price-inelastic and oil is paid for in US dollars. 

 If the price of oil falls rapidly, how might it affect the exchange rate of the US dollar? 

 market for US dollar exchange rate for US dollar 

 A greater demand for US$ value increases 

 B greater supply of US$ value falls 

 C less demand for US$ value falls 

 D less supply of US$ value increases 


© UCLES 2019 0455/12/M/J/19 

**29** What is the **most** likely disadvantage of international specialisation? 

 A decreased levels of global output 

 B increased average production costs 

 C increased productivity levels 

 D overdependence on other economies 

**30** A large amount of the agricultural products in a country were damaged by floods. 

 What is likely to have happened to the price of agricultural products and the volume of imports of agricultural products? 

 price of products volume of imports 

 A fall fall 

 B fall rise 

 C rise fall 

 D rise rise 


© UCLES 2019 0455/12/M/J/19 

## BLANK PAGE 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2019 0455/12/M/J/19 

## BLANK PAGE 


