 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. IB17 11_0620_23/3RP© UCLES 2017 [Turn over 

## *7280088800* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

### CHEMISTRY 0620/23 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) October/November 2017 Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet^ 45 minutes Soft clean eraserSoft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil.Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unlessthis has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

There areanswers **A** (^) , **forty B** , **C** questions on this paper. Answerand **D**. **all** questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the **one** you consider correct and record your choice in **soft pencil** on the separate Answer Sheet. **Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully.** Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer.Any rough working should be done in this booklet. A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16.Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2017 0620/23/O/N/17 

**1** Which statement describes sublimation? **A** Particles moving slowly past each other speed up and move further apart. **B** Particles vibrating next to each other become mobile and move slowly past each other. **C** Particles vibrating next to each other start to move rapidly and move further apart. **D** Rapidly moving particles slow down and move closer together. 

**2** 25 cm^3 of an alkali are added to 20 cm^3 of an acid. The temperature change is measured. Which apparatus is **not** needed in the experiment? **A** 25 cm^3 measuring cylinder **B** 100 cm^3 beaker **C** balance **D** thermometer 

**3** The painkiller paracetamol is synthesised from 4-aminophenol. Chromatography was carried out on an impure sample of paracetamol. The results are shown (not drawn to scale). 

### S P 

 0.35 cm 0.26 cm 0.17 cm 

 solvent front 

 baseline 

 key P 

### S 

 = pure paracetamol 

 = impure sample of paracetamol 

 The sample of paracetamol was contaminated with 4-aminophenol only. What is the R f value of 4-aminophenol? A 0.49 B 0.65 C 0.74 D 1.35 


© UCLES 2017 0620/23/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

## 4 Which compound is silicon(IV) oxide? 

 melting point / °C 

 good electrical conductor when solid 

 good electrical conductor when molten A –73 no no B 801 no yes C 1495 yes yes D 1710 no no 

**5** Carbon has three naturally occurring isotopes, 12 C, 13 C and 14 C. Which statement explains why the isotopes have the same chemical properties? **A** They have the same number of electrons in the first shell. **B** They have the same number of electrons in the outer shell. **C** They have the same number of neutrons in the nucleus. **D** They have the same number of protons as neutrons. 

**6** Which dot-and-cross diagram shows the outer shell electron arrangement in a molecule ofcarbon dioxide? 

# C 

### A 

# O O C 

### B 

# O O C 

### C 

# O O C 

### D 

# O O 

**7** The equation represents the reaction between solid magnesium oxide and dilute hydrochloric acid to form magnesium chloride and water. 

MgO + 2HC _l_ → MgC _l_ (^) 2 + H 2 O Which row shows the state symbols for hydrochloric acid, magnesium chloride and water? HC _l_ MgC _l_ (^) 2 H 2 O **A** (aq) (aq) (l) **B** (aq) (l) (l) **C** (l) (aq) (aq) **D** (l) (l) (aq) 


© UCLES 2017 0620/23/O/N/17 

**8** A compound contains 34.5% calcium, 24.1% silicon and 41.4% oxygen by mass. What is its empirical formula? **A** Ca 2 SiO 3 **B** CaSiO 3 **C** CaSi 2 O 3 **D** CaSiO 6 

## 9 Which statements about the electrolysis of concentrated copper(II) chloride are correct? 

## 1 Electrons are transferred from the cathode to the copper(II) ions. 

 2 Electrons move round the external circuit from the cathode to the anode. 3 Chloride ions are attracted to the anode. 4 Hydroxide ions transfer electrons to the cathode. A 1 and 3 B 1 and 4 C 2 and 3 D 2 and 4 

**10** Which metal combination produces the highest voltage reading in the cells shown? 

 V 

### A 

 Fe Cu 

### V 

### B 

 Zn Cu 

### V 

### C 

 Cu Cu 

### V 

### D 

 Mg Cu 


© UCLES 2017 0620/23/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**11** Some bond energies are shown in the table. 

 bond bond energy in kJ / mol H–H +436 O=O +496 H–O +460 Hydrogen reacts with oxygen. The reaction is exothermic. 2H 2 (g) + O 2 (g) → 2H 2 O(g) What is the energy change for the reaction? A –3208 kJ / mol B –908 kJ / mol C –472 kJ / mol D –448 kJ / mol 

**12** Which statement describes an exothermic reaction? **A** The energy absorbed for bond breaking is greater than the energy released by bond formation. **B** The energy absorbed for bond breaking is less than the energy released by bond formation. **C** The energy released by bond breaking is greater than the energy absorbed for bond formation. **D** The energy released by bond breaking is less than the energy absorbed for bond formation. 

**13** The mass of a beaker and its contents is plotted against time. Which graph represents what happens when sodium carbonate reacts with an excess of dilute hydrochloric acid in an open beaker? 

mass 

 time 

### A 

 mass 

 time 

### B 

 mass 

 time 

### C 

 mass 

 time 

### D 

(^00 00 00 00) 


© UCLES 2017 0620/23/O/N/17 

**14** Silver chloride reacts when it is exposed to light. Which row shows what happens to the silver in this process? half-equation type of reaction **A** Ag → Ag +^ + e –^ oxidation **B** Ag → Ag +^ + e –^ reduction **C** Ag +^ + e –^ → Ag oxidation **D** Ag +^ + e –^ → Ag reduction 

**15** Which statement about the effect of concentration and temperature on the rate of a reaction is **not** correct? **A** If the concentration of a reactant is increased, the rate of reaction increases because more particles have sufficient energy to react. **B** If the concentration of a reactant is increased, the rate of reaction increases because there are more collisions between particles per second. **C** If the temperature is increased, the rate of reaction increases because there are morecollisions between particles per second. **D** If the temperature is increased, the rate of reaction increases because more particles have sufficient energy to react. 

**16** The following reaction has reached equilibrium in a closed system. 2SO 2 (g) + O 2 (g) 2SO 3 (g) The forward reaction is exothermic. Which row shows the effect of increasing the pressure on the equilibrium mixture? reaction rate amount of SO 2 amount of SO 3 **A** increases decreases increases **B** increases increases decreases **C** unchanged decreases increases **D** unchanged increases decreases 


© UCLES 2017 0620/23/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**17** Some properties of four oxides are listed. Oxide 1 reacts with both acids and alkalis to form salts. Oxide 2 reacts with acids to form salts but does not react with alkalis. Oxide 3 reacts with alkalis to form salts but does not react with acids. Oxide 4 does not react with acids or alkalis. Which row describes the oxides? oxide 1 oxide 2 oxide 3 oxide 4 **A** amphoteric acidic basic neutral **B** amphoteric basic acidic neutral **C** neutral acidic basic amphoteric **D** neutral basic acidic amphoteric 

**18** What is **not** a typical characteristic of acids? **A** They react with alkalis producing water. **B** They react with **all** metals producing hydrogen. **C** They react with carbonates producing carbon dioxide. **D** They turn blue litmus paper red. 

**19** Three solids, P, Q and R, all react with dilute sulfuric acid to produce zinc sulfate. P and R produce gases during the reaction. The gas produced when P reacts will not burn. The gas produced when R reacts will burn. What are P, Q and R? P Q R **A** zinc zinc hydroxide zinc carbonate **B** zinc carbonate zinc zinc oxide **C** zinc carbonate zinc hydroxide zinc **D** zinc oxide zinc carbonate zinc 

**20** Which ion forms a green precipitate with aqueous sodium hydroxide that dissolves in an excess of aqueous sodium hydroxide? **A** Ca 2+^ **B** Cr 3+^ **C** Cu 2+^ **D** Fe 2+ 


© UCLES 2017 0620/23/O/N/17 

**21** A period of the Periodic Table is shown. 

 group I II III IV V VI VII VIII element R S T V W X Y Z The letters are not their chemical symbols. Which statement is correct? A Element R does not conduct electricity. B Elements R and Y react together to form an ionic compound. C Element Z exists as a diatomic molecule. D Element Z reacts with element T. 

**22** Some properties of element X are shown. 

 melting point in °C 98 boiling point in °C 883 reaction with cold water gives off H 2 gas reaction when heated with oxygen burns to give a white solid In which part of the Periodic Table is X found? A Group I B Group VII C Group VIII D transition elements 


© UCLES 2017 0620/23/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**23** The table gives some properties of an element. 

 melting point in °C 3422 appearance of the element grey appearance of the chloride of the element dark blue density in g / cm^3 19.2 electrical conductivity when solid good Which other property would you expect this element to have? A acts as a catalyst B brittle C forms an acidic oxide D highly reactive with water 

**24** Why is argon gas used to fill electric lamps? **A** It conducts electricity. **B** It glows when heated. **C** It is less dense than air. **D** It is not reactive. 

**25** What is a property of **all** metals? **A** conduct electricity **B** hard **C** low melting points **D** react with water 

**26** Aluminium is obtained by the electrolysis of a mixture of aluminium oxide and cryolite. Why is cryolite used? **A** as a catalyst to speed up the process **B** as a coolant to prevent the process getting too hot **C** as a solvent for aluminium oxide **D** as the main source of aluminium ions 


© UCLES 2017 0620/23/O/N/17 

**27** Metal M is mixed with copper to produce brass. What is M? **A** chromium **B** nickel **C** vanadium **D** zinc 

**28** Some metal nitrates and carbonates decompose when heated strongly. Metal Q has a nitrate that decomposes to give a salt and a colourless gas only. The carbonate of metal Q does not decompose when heated with a Bunsen burner. What is metal Q? **A** calcium **B** copper **C** sodium **D** zinc 

**29** The flow chart shows stages in the treatment of river water to produce drinking water. 

 drinking water 

 stage Y 

 stage X 

 settling tank 

 river water What occurs at stages X and Y? X Y A distillation chlorination B distillation filtration C filtration chlorination D filtration distillation 


© UCLES 2017 0620/23/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**30** A piece of zinc is attached to the hull of a steel boat. Steel is an alloy of iron. Which statement explains why the zinc prevents the iron from rusting? **A** Zinc is less reactive than iron, and iron is less likely to lose electrons than zinc. **B** Zinc is less reactive than iron, and iron is more likely to lose electrons than zinc. **C** Zinc is more reactive than iron, and iron is less likely to lose electrons than zinc. **D** Zinc is more reactive than iron, and iron is more likely to lose electrons than zinc. 

**31** The Haber process for making ammonia is carried out at a temperature of 450 °C and a pressure of 200 atmospheres in the presence of a catalyst. Which statement is **not** correct? **A** Lowering the pressure increases the rate at which ammonia is produced. **B** Lowering the temperature slows down the rate at which ammonia is produced. **C** Maintaining a very high pressure is very difficult and needs expensive equipment. **D** The reaction is a reversible reaction which can proceed forwards and backwards. 

**32** Which process does **not** produce carbon dioxide? **A** combustion of methane **B** photosynthesis **C** respiration **D** thermal decomposition of calcium carbonate 

**33** Which row shows the conditions used in the manufacture of sulfuric acid by the Contact process? 

 temperature / °C 

 pressure / atm catalyst A 40 200 Fe B 40 200 V 2 O 5 C 400 2 Fe D 400 2 V 2 O 5 


© UCLES 2017 0620/23/O/N/17 

**34** Some marble chips (calcium carbonate) are heated strongly and substances X and Y are formed. Substance X is a white solid that reacts with water, giving out heat. Substance Y is a colourless gas. What are substances X and Y? X Y **A** calcium chloride oxygen **B** calcium hydroxide carbon dioxide **C** calcium oxide carbon dioxide **D** calcium sulfate oxygen 

**35** The structure of compound R is shown. 

 H C C OH 

### H 

### H 

### H 

### H 

### C 

### H 

### H 

 What is R? A propane B propanoic acid C propanol D propene 

**36** Fuel oil and naphtha are two fractions obtained from petroleum. What are the major uses of these fractions? fuel oil naphtha **A** jet fuel making chemicals **B** jet fuel making roads **C** ship fuel making chemicals **D** ship fuel making roads 


© UCLES 2017 0620/23/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**37** X, Y and Z are three hydrocarbons. 

X CH 2 =CH 2 Y CH 3 –CH=CH 2 Z CH 3 –CH 2 –CH=CH (^2) What do compounds X, Y and Z have in common? 1 They are all alkenes. 2 They are all part of the same homologous series. 3 They all have the same boiling point. **A** 1, 2 and 3 **B** 1 and 2 only **C** 1 and 3 only **D** 2 and 3 only **38** The diagram shows a reaction sequence. butane ethene ethanol carbon dioxideand water 

### X Y Z 

 Which row names the processes X, Y and Z? X Y Z A cracking fermentation respiration B cracking hydration combustion C distillation fermentation respiration D distillation hydration combustion 

**39** The structure of an ester is shown. 

 C 

### H 

### H 

### H C C 

### O 

### O 

### H 

### H C 

### H 

### H 

### C 

### H 

### H 

### C 

### H 

### H 

### C H 

### H 

### H 

 Which combination of carboxylic acid and alcohol produces this ester? carboxylic acid alcohol A butanoic acid ethanol B butanoic acid propanol C ethanoic acid butanol D propanoic acid butanol 


© UCLES 2017 0620/23/O/N/17 

**40** The equation shows the formation of a polymer called _Kevlar_. 

 HOOC COOH 

### C 

### O 

### C 

_n_ + _n_ H 2 N NH (^2) _n_ 

### O 

### N 

### H 

### N 

### H 

### – H 2 O 

 Which row describes Kevlar? how the polymer is formed type of polymer A addition polymerisation polyamide B addition polymerisation polyester C condensation polymerisation polyamide D condensation polymerisation polyester 


### BLANK PAGE 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeInternational Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge LocalExaminations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2017 0620/23/O/N/17 


© UCLES 2017 0620/23/O/N/17 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements^1 Hhydrogen^1 

(^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII^ VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Beberyllium 9 **Key** atomic numberatomic symbol name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mgmagnesium 24 19 Kpotassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Srstrontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Gegermanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 (^22) Tititanium (^4840) Zrzirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rfrutherfordium– 23 Vvanadium (^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Crchromium (^5242) Momolybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sgseaborgium– (^25) Mnmanganese (^5543) Tctechnetium– (^75) Rerhenium (^186107) Bhbohrium– (^26) Feiron (^5644) Ruruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Iriridium (^192109) Mtmeitnerium– (^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pdpalladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Dsdarmstadtium– (^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rgroentgenium– (^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cdcadmium (^11280) Hgmercury (^201112) Cncopernicium– 114 F _l_ flerovium– (^116) Lvlivermorium– (^7) Nnitrogen 1415 Pphosphorus (^3133) Asarsenic (^7551) Sbantimony 12283 Bibismuth 209 (^8) Ooxygen 1616 Ssulfur (^3234) Seselenium (^7952) Tetellurium (^12884) Popolonium– (^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Brbromine 8053 I iodine 12785 Atastatine– (^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Scscandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) Lalanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). actinium– (^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium^141 (^91) Paprotactinium 231 (^60) Ndneodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pmpromethium– (^93) Npneptunium– (^62) Smsamarium (^15094) Puplutonium– (^63) Eueuropium (^15295) Amamericium– (^64) Gdgadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bkberkelium– (^66) Dydysprosium 16398 Cfcalifornium– (^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Eseinsteinium– (^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Mdmendelevium– (^70) Ybytterbium (^173102) Nonobelium– (^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lrlawrencium– 


