 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level1/Level 2 Certificate. This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. IB17 11_0620_12/3RP© UCLES 2017 [Turn over 

# *1011389924* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## CHEMISTRY 0620/12 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) October/November 2017 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer SheetSoft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unlessthis has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

There areanswers **A** (^) , **forty B** , **C** questions on this paper. Answerand **D**. **all** questions. For each question there are four possible Choose the **one** you consider correct and record your choice in **soft pencil** on the separate Answer Sheet. **Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully.** Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. A copy of the Periodic Table is printed on page 16. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2017 0620/12/O/N/17 

**1** The melting points and boiling points of four elements are shown. 

element (^) pointmelting / °C pointboiling / °C W –7 60 X –101 –34 Y 114 184 Z 39 688 In which elements do the particles vibrate about fixed positions at 0 °C? **A** W and X **B** W and Z **C** X and Y **D** Y and Z **2** The apparatus used to separate a mixture is shown. mixture funnel filter paper What is the mixture? **A** aqueous calcium chloride and aqueous calcium nitrate **B** calcium carbonate and aqueous calcium chloride **C** ethanol and water **D** sand and calcium carbonate **3** During an experiment a measurement is recorded in cm 3. Which apparatus is used? **A** balance **B** measuring cylinder **C** stopclock **D** thermometer 


© UCLES 2017 0620/12/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**4** Substance Q boils at 445 °C and is a yellow solid at room temperature. 

 Which temperature could be the melting point of pure Q? A –9 °C B 72 °C to 78 °C C 116 °C D 116 °C to 126 °C 

**5** Which diagram shows a mixture of an element and a compound? **A B C D** 

**6** Which pair of atoms contains the same number of neutrons? 

 A^5927 Coand 5928 Ni B^6429 Cuand 6529 Cu C^6429 Cuand 6530 Zn D^6529 Cuand 6530 Zn 

**7** In which row do the properties described match the type of bonding? 

 melting point electrical conductivitywhen liquid type of bonding A high does not conduct ionic B low conducts covalent C low conducts ionic D low does not conduct covalent 


© UCLES 2017 0620/12/O/N/17 

**8** Which statement explains why graphite is used a lubricant? **A** All bonds between the atoms are weak. **B** It conducts electricity. **C** It has a low melting point. **D** Layers in the structure can slide over each other. 

**9** What is the relative formula mass of magnesium nitrate, Mg(NO 3 ) 2? **A** 74 **B** 86 **C** 134 **D** 148 

**10** The diagram shows the electrolysis of two solutions using inert electrodes. 

 dilute sulfuric acid 

 concentrated aqueous sodium chloride 

## + P^ Q^ – +R S– 

 Which substance is made at each electrode? P Q R S A hydrogen oxygen chlorine sodium B hydrogen oxygen sodium chlorine C oxygen hydrogen chlorine hydrogen D oxygen hydrogen hydrogen chlorine 


© UCLES 2017 0620/12/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**11** Two chemical processes are described. ● During the combustion of ethanol, energy is ......1....... ● During the electrolysis of aqueous sodium chloride, energy is ......2....... Which words complete gaps 1 and 2? 1 2 **A** given out given out **B** given out taken in **C** taken in given out **D** taken in taken in 

# 12 Water is added to anhydrous copper(II) sulfate in a test-tube. 

 The mixture becomes hot. Which type of reaction and energy level diagram apply to this reaction? type of reaction energy level diagram 

 A endothermic energy 

 reactants products 

 B endothermic energy reactants 

 products 

 C exothermic energy 

 reactants products 

 D exothermic^ energy reactants 

 products 


© UCLES 2017 0620/12/O/N/17 

**13** The mass of a beaker and its contents is plotted against time. Which graph represents what happens when sodium carbonate reacts with an excess of dilute hydrochloric acid in an open beaker? 

mass 

 time 

## A 

 mass 

 time 

## B 

 mass 

 time 

## C 

 mass 

 time 

## D 

(^00 00 00 00) 

# 14 When blue copper(II) sulfate is heated, a white solid and water are formed. 

 The white solid turns blue and gives out heat when water is added to it. 

# Which terms describe the blue copper(II) sulfate and the reactions? 

 the blue 

# copper(II) sulfate is reactions 

 A a mixture can be reversed B a mixture cannot be reversed C hydrated can be reversed D hydrated cannot be reversed 


© UCLES 2017 0620/12/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**15** An experiment was carried out to find the rate of reaction when 1 g of solid X reacts with 100 cm^3 of solution Y. 

 solid X^ solution Y 

 gas syringe 

 The experiment took place too quickly for measurements to be made. Which change could be made to slow down the reaction? A add a catalyst B decrease the concentration of solution Y C decrease the particle size of solid X D increase the temperature 

**16** The equations for two reactions P and Q are given. 

 P 2NaNO 2 + O 2 → 2NaNO 3 Q 2HgO → 2Hg + O 2 In which of these reactions does oxidation of the underlined substance occur? P Q A   B   C   D   

**17** What is **not** a typical characteristic of acids? **A** They react with alkalis producing water. **B** They react with **all** metals producing hydrogen. **C** They react with carbonates producing carbon dioxide. **D** They turn blue litmus paper red. 


© UCLES 2017 0620/12/O/N/17 

**18** Elements Q and R both burn in air. The oxides formed both dissolve in water. The solution of the oxide formed from element Q turns Universal Indicator red. The solution of the oxide formed from element R turns Universal Indicator blue. What are Q and R? Q R **A** carbon sulfur **B** sodium magnesium **C** sodium sulfur **D** sulfur sodium 

# 19 Copper(II) sulfate can be prepared by adding excess copper(II) carbonate to sulfuric acid. 

# Why is an excess of copper(II) carbonate added? 

# A to ensure all the copper(II) carbonate has reacted 

 B to ensure all the sulfuric acid has reacted C to increase the rate of reaction 

# D to increase the yield of copper(II) sulfate 

**20** Compound P reacts with hydrochloric acid to produce a gas that turns limewater milky. 

 What is P? A sodium carbonate B sodium chloride C sodium hydroxide D sodium sulfate 

**21** Which statement about nitrogen and phosphorus is **not** correct? **A** Both are in the same group of the Periodic Table. **B** Both are in the same period of the Periodic Table. **C** Both are non-metals. **D** Both have the same number of electrons in their outer shell. 


© UCLES 2017 0620/12/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**22** Sodium and rubidium are elements in Group I of the Periodic Table. Which statement is correct? **A** Sodium atoms have more electrons than rubidium atoms. **B** Sodium has a lower density than rubidium. **C** Sodium has a lower melting point than rubidium. **D** Sodium is more reactive than rubidium. 

**23** Which properties do the elements chromium, iron and vanadium have in common? 

 1 They all conduct electricity. 2 They, or their compounds, can act as catalysts. 3 They all form coloured compounds. A 1, 2 and 3 B 1 and 2 only C 1 and 3 only D 2 and 3 only 

**24** Why is argon gas used to fill electric lamps? **A** It conducts electricity. **B** It glows when heated. **C** It is less dense than air. **D** It is not reactive. 

**25** What is a property of **all** metals? **A** conduct electricity **B** hard **C** low melting points **D** react with water 

**26** Which process is used to extract iron from hematite in the blast furnace? **A** electrolysis **B** reduction with carbon monoxide **C** reduction with lime **D** thermal decomposition 


© UCLES 2017 0620/12/O/N/17 

**27** Some reactions of three metals are listed in the table. 

 metal metal reacts with dilutehydrochloric acid reduced by carbonmetal oxide is P yes yes Q yes no R no yes What is the order of reactivity of the metals? most reactive 

 least reactive A P Q R B P R Q C Q P R D R P Q 

**28** Which uses of the metals shown are both correct? 

 aluminium copper A aircraft bodies electrical wiring B car bodies aircraft bodies C chemical plant cooking utensils D food containers chemical plant 

**29** The flow chart shows stages in the treatment of river water to produce drinking water. 

 drinking water 

 stage Y 

 stage X 

 settling tank 

 river water What occurs at stages X and Y? X Y A distillation chlorination B distillation filtration C filtration chlorination D filtration distillation 


© UCLES 2017 0620/12/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**30** Which element in Group VI is a component of air? **A** argon **B** nitrogen **C** oxygen **D** sulfur 

**31** Iron is a metal that rusts in the presence of oxygen and water. Mild steel is used for ......1...... and is prevented from rusting by ......2....... Stainless steel does not rust. It is produced by ......3...... iron with another metal. Which words complete gaps 1, 2 and 3? 1 2 3 **A** car bodies greasing covering **B** car bodies painting mixing **C** cutlery greasing covering **D** cutlery painting mixing 

**32** A chemical reaction is carried out on substance X. A gas is produced that turns red litmus paper blue. What is this reaction? **A** the reaction of an acid with a metal carbonate **B** the reaction of an acid with an ammonium salt **C** the reaction of an alkali with a metal carbonate **D** the reaction of an alkali with an ammonium salt 


© UCLES 2017 0620/12/O/N/17 

**33** Some marble chips (calcium carbonate) are heated strongly and substances X and Y are formed. Substance X is a white solid that reacts with water, giving out heat. Substance Y is a colourless gas. What are substances X and Y? X Y **A** calcium chloride oxygen **B** calcium hydroxide carbon dioxide **C** calcium oxide carbon dioxide **D** calcium sulfate oxygen 

**34** The structures of four organic compounds are shown. 

## H C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## H 

## S 

## H 

## H 

## C C H H C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## T 

## H C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## V 

## H C 

## C 

## H 

## C 

## C 

## H 

## U 

## H 

## H 

## H H 

## H 

 Which compounds are unsaturated? A S only B T and U C U only D V only 

**35** Which statement is **not** correct? **A** Petroleum is a mixture of hydrocarbons. **B** The main constituent of natural gas is ethane. **C** The naphtha fraction of petroleum is used for making chemicals. **D** When natural gas burns in air, carbon dioxide and water are formed. 

**36** Which equation represents the complete combustion of butane, C 4 H 10? **A** 2C 4 H 10 + 5O 2 → 8C + 10H 2 O **B** 2C 4 H 10 + 9O 2 → 8CO + 10H 2 O **C** 2C 4 H 10 + 13O 2 → 8CO 2 + 10H 2 O **D** C 4 H 10 + 4O 2 → 4CO 2 + 5H 2 


© UCLES 2017 0620/12/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**37** X, Y and Z are three hydrocarbons. 

X CH 2 =CH 2 Y CH 3 –CH=CH 2 Z CH 3 –CH 2 –CH=CH (^2) What do compounds X, Y and Z have in common? 1 They are all alkenes. 2 They are all part of the same homologous series. 3 They all have the same boiling point. **A** 1, 2 and 3 **B** 1 and 2 only **C** 1 and 3 only **D** 2 and 3 only **38** The table shows bonds that are present and bonds that are not present in compound X. bond C–C  C=C  C–H  C–O  C=O  O–H  What type of compound is X? **A** a carboxylic acid **B** an alcohol **C** an alkane **D** an alkene **39** The diagram shows a reaction sequence. butane ethene ethanol carbon dioxideand water 

## X Y Z 

 Which row names the processes X, Y and Z? X Y Z A cracking fermentation respiration B cracking hydration combustion C distillation fermentation respiration D distillation hydration combustion 


© UCLES 2017 0620/12/O/N/17 

**40** Molecules of a substance react together as shown. 

## H H 

## H H 

## C C 

## H H 

## H H 

## C C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H 

## H 

## C 

## H H 

## H H 

## + + C C 

 Which type of reaction has taken place? A cracking B oxidation C polymerisation D reduction 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Everyreasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the CambridgeInternational Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge LocalExaminations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. © UCLES 2017 0620/12/O/N/17 

## BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2017 0620/12/O/N/17 

 Group 

 The Periodic Table of Elements^1 Hhydrogen^1 

(^2) Hehelium 4 I^ II^ III^ IV^ V^ VI^ VII VIII (^3) Lilithium 7 (^4) Beberyllium 9 atomic number atomic symbol **Key**^ name relative atomic mass (^11) Nasodium 23 (^12) Mgmagnesium 24 19 Kpotassium 39 (^20) Cacalcium 40 (^37) Rbrubidium 85 (^38) Srstrontium 88 (^55) Cscaesium 133 (^56) Babarium 137 (^87) Frfrancium– (^88) Raradium– (^5) Bboron (^1113) A _l_ aluminium (^2731) Gagallium (^7049) Inindium 11581 T _l_ thallium 204 (^6) Ccarbon (^1214) Sisilicon (^2832) Gegermanium (^7350) Sntin (^11982) Pblead 207 (^22) Tititanium (^4840) Zrzirconium (^9172) Hfhafnium 178104 Rf rutherfordium 

- 

23 Vvanadium (^5141) Nbniobium (^9373) Tatantalum (^181105) Dbdubnium– (^24) Crchromium (^5242) Momolybdenum (^9674) Wtungsten (^184106) Sgseaborgium– (^25) Mnmanganese (^5543) Tctechnetium– (^75) Rerhenium (^186107) Bhbohrium– (^26) Feiron (^5644) Ruruthenium (^10176) Ososmium (^190108) Hshassium– (^27) Cocobalt (^5945) Rhrhodium 10377 Iriridium (^192109) Mtmeitnerium– (^28) Ninickel (^5946) Pdpalladium 10678 Ptplatinum (^195110) Ds darmstadtium 

- 

(^29) Cucopper (^6447) Agsilver (^10879) Augold (^197111) Rgroentgenium– (^30) Znzinc (^6548) Cdcadmium (^11280) Hgmercury (^201112) Cncopernicium– 114 F _l_ flerovium– (^116) Lvlivermorium– (^7) Nnitrogen 1415 P phosphorus^3133 Asarsenic^7551 Sbantimony^12283 Bibismuth^209 (^8) Ooxygen 1616 Ssulfur (^3234) Seselenium (^7952) Tetellurium (^12884) Popolonium– (^9) Ffluorine (^1917) C _l_ chlorine35.5 (^35) Brbromine 8053 I iodine 12785 Atastatine– (^10) Neneon (^2018) Arargon (^4036) Krkrypton (^8454) Xexenon (^13186) Rnradon– (^21) Scscandium 4539 Yyttrium (^89) 57–71lanthanoids89–103actinoids (^57) Lalanthanum (^13989) Ac lanthanoidsactinoidsThe volume of one mole of any gas is 24 dm 3 at room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.). actinium– (^58) Cecerium (^14090) Ththorium 232 (^59) Pr praseodymium (^14191) Paprotactinium 231 (^60) Ndneodymium 14492 Uuranium 238 (^61) Pmpromethium– (^93) Npneptunium– (^62) Smsamarium (^15094) Puplutonium– (^63) Eueuropium (^15295) Amamericium– (^64) Gdgadolinium (^15796) Cmcurium– (^65) Tbterbium (^15997) Bkberkelium– (^66) Dydysprosium 16398 Cfcalifornium– (^67) Hoholmium (^16599) Eseinsteinium– (^68) Ererbium (^167100) Fmfermium– (^69) Tmthulium (^169101) Md mendelevium 

- 

(^70) Ybytterbium (^173102) Nonobelium– (^71) Lulutetium 175103 Lrlawrencium– 


