 This document has 20 pages. Blank pages are indicated. 

 IB20 03_0625_12/5RP 

© UCLES 2020 (^) **[Turn over** 

### *6993319596* 

## Cambridge IGCSE 

### ™ 

#### PHYSICS 0625/12 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) February/March 2020 45 minutes 

 You must answer on the multiple choice answer sheet. 

 You will need: Multiple choice answer sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 INSTRUCTIONS 

- There are **forty** questions on this paper. Answer **all** questions. 

- For each question there are four possible answers **A** , **B** , **C** and **D**. Choose the **one** you consider correct     and record your choice in soft pencil on the multiple choice answer sheet. 

- Follow the instructions on the multiple choice answer sheet. 

- Write in soft pencil. 

- Write your name, centre number and candidate number on the multiple choice answer sheet in the     spaces provided unless this has been done for you. 

- Do **not** use correction fluid. 

- Do **not** write on any bar codes. 

- You may use a calculator. 

- Take the weight of 1.0 kg to be 10 N (acceleration of free fall = 10 m / s 2 ). 

 INFORMATION 

- The total mark for this paper is 40. 

- Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. 

- Any rough working should be done on this question paper. 


© UCLES 2020 0625/12/F/M/20 

**1** The diagram shows a rectangular metal sheet close to two rulers. 

#### 0 

#### 0 

#### 10 

#### 20 

#### 30 

 cm^10 20 30 40 50 

 cm 

 metal sheet 

 What is the area of the metal sheet? 

 A 700 cm^2 B 875 cm^2 C 900 cm^2 D 1125 cm^2 

**2** The graph shows how the speed of a car changes with time over part of a journey. 

#### 0 

#### 0 

 speed 

 time 

#### 1 

#### 2 

#### 3 

#### 4 

 Which section of the graph shows acceleration and which section of the graph shows deceleration? 

 acceleration deceleration 

 A 1 2 

 B 1 3 

 C 2 4 

 D 3 1 


© UCLES 2020 0625/12/F/M/20 **[Turn over** 

**3** A steel ball is dropped from the top floor of a building. Air resistance can be ignored. 

 Which statement describes the motion of the ball? 

 A The ball falls with constant acceleration. 

 B The ball falls with constant speed. 

 C The ball falls with decreasing speed. 

 D The ball falls with increasing acceleration. 

**4** Diagram 1 shows a piece of flexible material that contains many pockets of air. Diagram 2 shows the same piece of flexible material after it has been compressed so that its volume decreases. 

 diagram 1 (before compression) 

 diagram 2 (after compression) 

 What happens to the mass and to the weight of the flexible material when it is compressed? 

 mass weight 

 A increases increases 

 B increases no change 

 C no change increases 

 D no change no change 

**5** On the Moon, the gravitational field strength _g_ is 1.6 N / kg. 

 An object has a mass of 2.0 kg. 

 What is the weight of the object on the Moon? 

 A 0 N B 1.3 N C 3.2 N D 20.0 N 

**6** A measuring cylinder contains 40 cm^3 of water. 

 A solid metal ball is dropped into the water and the water level rises to 56 cm^3. 

 The mass of the ball is 80 g. 

 What is the density of the metal from which the ball is made? 

 A 0.20 g / cm^3 B 1.4 g / cm^3 C 2.0 g / cm^3 D 5.0 g / cm^3 


© UCLES 2020 0625/12/F/M/20 

**7** A car travels along a horizontal road at constant speed. Three horizontal forces act on the car. The diagram shows two of these forces. 

 air resistance 300 N 

 force from engine 1500 N 

 direction of motion forwards 

 What is the size and the direction of the third horizontal force acting on the car? 

 A 1200 N backwards 

 B 1200 N forwards 

 C 1800 N backwards 

 D 1800 N forwards 

**8** A force _F_ is applied to a spanner, as shown. 

#### F 

 nut 

 spanner 

 Which action increases the moment of F about the centre of the nut? 

 A apply the force F to the end of the spanner handle 

 B apply the force F parallel to the spanner handle 

 C spray oil on the nut 

 D use a shorter spanner 

**9** A ball is released from rest and rolls down a track from the position shown. 

 What is the furthest position that it is possible for the ball to reach? 

 ball starts here 

#### A 

#### C 

#### B 

#### D 


© UCLES 2020 0625/12/F/M/20 **[Turn over** 

**10** Which row describes an advantage and a disadvantage of wind turbines? 

 advantage disadvantage 

 A no fuel needed harmful gases released 

 B variable supply fuel needed 

 C no harmful gases released variable supply 

 D constant supply noisy 

**11** A box of mass _m_ and weight _W_ is carried up some stairs of total height _x_ and total width _y_. 

 y 

 x box 

 On which quantities does the work done against gravity on the box depend? 

 A m and y B W and x C W and y D x and y 


© UCLES 2020 0625/12/F/M/20 

**12** Diagram 1 shows a tube sealed at one end and partly immersed in mercury. The tube has a diameter _d_. The top of the mercury in the tube is a height _h_ above the mercury reservoir. 

 h 

 vacuum 

 mercury reservoir 

 diagram 1 

 Diagram 2 shows a similar arrangement with a tube that has a diameter 2 d. 

 x 

 vacuum 

 diagram 2 

 mercury reservoir 

 What is the relationship between h and x? 

 A x = 2 h 

 B x = h 

 C x = 2 

 h 

 D x = 4 

 h 


© UCLES 2020 0625/12/F/M/20 **[Turn over** 

**13** A skier is standing still on a flat area of snow. 

 skis 

 The weight of the skier is 550 N. The total area of his skis in contact with the ground is 0.015 m^2. 

 What is the pressure exerted on the ground by the skier? 

 A 0.83 N / m^2 B 8.3 N / m^2 C 3700 N / m^2 D 37 000 N / m^2 

**14** The molecules of a substance in a particular state of matter move freely with random motion. The average speed of the molecules is increasing. 

 What is being described? 

 A a gas being heated 

 B a liquid evaporating 

 C a solid being heated 

 D a solid melting 

**15** A student measures the mass of warm water in an open container over two minutes. The container is kept at a constant temperature. The results are in the table. 

 time / minutes mass / g 

 0.0 33.9 

 0.5 30.6 

 1.0 27.6 

 1.5 24.9 

 2.0 22.5 

 Why does the mass of the water change? 

 A The water evaporates. 

 B The water freezes. 

 C The water condenses. 

 D The water boils. 


© UCLES 2020 0625/12/F/M/20 

**16** Which points are the fixed points of the liquid-in-glass thermometer shown? 

 –10 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 °C 

 A the beginning and end points of the column of liquid 

 B the points marked –10 °C and 110 °C 

 C the points marked 0 °C and 100 °C 

 D the top and bottom points of the thermometer bulb 

**17** Four different metal blocks are given the same quantity of thermal energy. 

 Which block has the greatest thermal capacity? 

 A 

 temperature rise = 1 °C 

#### B 

 temperature rise = 2 °C 

#### C 

 temperature rise = 3 °C 

#### D 

 temperature rise = 4 °C 

**18** A solid is heated from room temperature. 

 The graph shows how its temperature changes with time as it is heated constantly. 

 At which time has it just become completely liquid? 

#### 0 

#### 0 A^ B^ C^ D 

 room temperature 

 temperature 

 time 


© UCLES 2020 0625/12/F/M/20 **[Turn over** 

**19** Rods of the same shape and size are inserted through corks into a tank of hot water. Each rod is covered with a layer of solid wax that has a low melting point. After a period of time, some wax melts. 

 hot water tank 

 good thermal conductor 

 bad thermal moderate thermal conductor conductor 

 cork 

 On which rod will the wax melt first? 

 A all at the same time 

 B good thermal conductor 

 C bad thermal conductor 

 D moderate thermal conductor 

**20** A boy jumps into an indoor swimming pool. He notices that the water appears to get colder as he goes deeper underwater. This is due to convection. 

 Which statement is correct? 

 A Cold water is more dense than warm water so it sinks to the bottom of the pool. 

 B Warm water is more dense than cold water so it rises to the surface of the pool. 

 C The molecules in cold water have more kinetic energy than the molecules in warm water so they move to the bottom of the pool faster. 

 D The molecules in warm water are closer together than the molecules in cold water so they rise to the surface of the pool. 


© UCLES 2020 0625/12/F/M/20 

**21** The diagrams show examples of wave motion. 

 1 2 

 waves on water waves in air 

 waves on a rope waves in a spring 

#### 3 4 

 ripple tank 

 drum 

 Which waves are longitudinal? 

 A 1 only B 2 and 3 only C 2, 3 and 4 D 2 and 4 only 


© UCLES 2020 0625/12/F/M/20 **[Turn over** 

**22** Waves on the surface of water travel from deep to shallow water. 

 Which diagram shows the correct path of the waves in the shallow water? 

 deep water 

#### A 

 shallow water 

 deep water 

#### B 

 shallow water 

 deep water 

#### C 

 shallow water deep water 

#### D 

 shallow water 


© UCLES 2020 0625/12/F/M/20 

**23** Which diagram shows how the light from a candle is reflected by a mirror, and shows the position of the image formed? 

 eye 

 candle 

 image of candle 

#### A 

 eye 

 candle 

 eye 

 candle 

 image of candle 

#### B 

 image of candle 

#### C D 

 eye 

 candle 

 image of candle 

 mirror 

 mirror 

 mirror 

 mirror 


© UCLES 2020 0625/12/F/M/20 **[Turn over** 

**24** The diagram shows an image being formed by a converging lens. 

#### F 

 object 

 image 

#### 2F F 2F 

 Which description of the image formed is correct? 

 A enlarged and inverted 

 B enlarged and upright 

 C diminished and inverted 

 D diminished and upright 

**25** The horn on a ship makes a sound. The captain on the ship hears an echo from a cliff 4.0 s later. 

 The speed of sound is 340 m / s. 

 How far away is the cliff from the ship? 

 A 170 m B 340 m C 680 m D 1360 m 

**26** Bats produce ultrasound waves to navigate. 

 What is a possible frequency range for these waves? 

 A 0–20 Hz 

 B 20 Hz–2000 Hz 

 C 2 kHz–20 kHz 

 D 20 kHz–120 kHz 

**27** The table shows the forces that exist between magnetic poles. 

 Which row is correct? 

 N pole and N pole N pole and S pole 

 A attraction attraction 

 B attraction repulsion 

 C repulsion attraction 

 D repulsion repulsion 


© UCLES 2020 0625/12/F/M/20 

**28** The diagrams show three different metal rods P, Q and R, inside coils of wire. 

 Small iron nails are placed on a wooden bench under the rods. 

 Diagram 1 shows the situation when there are electric currents in the wires. 

 Diagram 2 shows the situation when the currents are switched off. 

#### P 

 wooden bench 

 current in coils 

 diagram 1 Q R 

#### P 

 no current in coils 

 diagram 2 Q R 

 wooden bench 

 Which row correctly identifies the metal rods? 

#### P Q R 

 A copper soft iron steel 

 B soft iron copper steel 

 C steel soft iron copper 

 D copper steel soft iron 

**29** A polythene rod becomes negatively charged when it is rubbed with a cloth. 

 Which statement explains this? 

 A The rod gains electrons. 

 B The rod loses electrons. 

 C The rod gains protons. 

 D The rod loses protons. 


© UCLES 2020 0625/12/F/M/20 **[Turn over** 

**30** The diagram shows a reading on an ammeter. 

### 6 

 8 

### 10 

### 4 

### 2 

### 0 

### A 

 What is the reading? 

 A 0.45 A B 0.50 A C 4.5 A D 5.0 A 

**31** A student is to determine the resistance of resistor R. She uses a circuit including a voltmeter and an ammeter. 

 Which circuit should be used? 

 A 

#### V A 

#### R 

#### B 

#### R 

#### A 

#### V 

#### C 

#### R 

#### A 

#### V 

#### D 

#### R 

#### V 

#### A 


© UCLES 2020 0625/12/F/M/20 

**32** The diagram shows a battery connected to two resistors. Three ammeters M 1 , M 2 and M 3 are connected in the circuit. 

M (^1) 

#### M 2 

#### A M 3 

#### A 

#### A 

 Ammeter M 1 reads 1.0 A. 

 What are the readings on M 2 and on M 3? 

 reading on M 2 / A 

 reading on M 3 / A 

 A 0.0 0.0 

 B 0.5 0.5 

 C 0.5 1.0 D 1.0 1.0 

**33** Lamps in a circuit are connected in parallel. 

 What is the advantage of this? 

 A If one lamp breaks, the others remain lit. 

 B Less current is taken from the power supply. 

 C The lamps use less power than if they were connected in series. 

 D The potential difference across each lamp is less than that of the power supply. 


© UCLES 2020 0625/12/F/M/20 **[Turn over** 

**34** The diagram shows a relay being used to control a buzzer. 

 relay 

 What is the function of the circuit? 

 A The buzzer switches off when the circuit becomes cold. 

 B The buzzer switches off when the circuit becomes light. 

 C The buzzer switches on when the circuit becomes cold. 

 D The buzzer switches on when the circuit becomes light. 

**35** There is a 5 A fuse in the circuit of an appliance. 

 What is the purpose of the fuse and in which wire is it connected? 

 purpose 

 wire in which it is connected 

 A breaks the circuit if the current is greater than 5 A earth 

 B breaks the circuit if the current is greater than 5 A live 

 C breaks the circuit if the current is less than 5 A earth 

 D breaks the circuit if the current is less than 5 A live 

**36** The diagram shows a transformer that has an output voltage of 12 V. 

 240 V a.c. input 

 12 V a.c. output 

 primary coil with 1000 turns 

 secondary coil 

 soft iron core 

 How many turns of wire are in the secondary coil? 

 A 12 B 20 C 50 D 20 000 


© UCLES 2020 0625/12/F/M/20 

**37** A current-carrying conductor is placed between two magnetic poles. The current causes a force to act on the wire. 

## N S 

 force wire 

 current direction 

 Three other arrangements P, Q and R, of the wire and magnetic poles are set up as shown. 

## N S 

 current reversed 

#### P 

## S N 

 magnetic poles switched around 

#### Q 

## S N 

 current reversed and magnetic poles switched around 

#### R 

 Which arrangements will cause a force in the opposite direction to that shown in the top diagram? 

 A P, Q and R B P and Q only C P only D R only 

**38** The symbol for a radioactive nuclide of carbon is 

#### 14 

# 6 C^. 

 How many neutrons are in its nucleus? 

 A 6 B 8 C 14 D 20 


© UCLES 2020 0625/12/F/M/20 **[Turn over** 

**39** A student measures the rate at which ionising radiation is emitted from a radioactive substance. 

 He places a detector at different distances from the radioactive source. 

 radioactive 

source (^) detector counter distance _d_ The table shows how the reading on the counter varies with distance _d_. The readings on the counter are corrected for background radiation. distance _d_ / cm 0 2 4 6 counter reading / counts per minute 1250 115 0 0 Which type of ionising radiation is being emitted by the substance? **A** α-particles **B** β-particles **C** γ-rays **D** X-rays 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2020 0625/12/F/M/20 

**40** The graph shows the count rate from a radioactive source over a period of time. 

#### 2000 

#### 1500 

#### 1000 

#### 500 

#### 0 

#### 0 1 2 3 

 time / hours 

 count rate counts / s 

 What is the half-life of the source? 

 A 0.5 hour B 1.0 hour C 1.5 hours D 3.0 hours 


