 This document has 20 pages. Blank pages are indicated. 

 IB20 03_0625_22/5RP 

© UCLES 2020 (^) **[Turn over** 

## *6305326820* 

# Cambridge IGCSE 

## ™ 

### PHYSICS 0625/22 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) February/March 2020 45 minutes 

 You must answer on the multiple choice answer sheet. 

 You will need: Multiple choice answer sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 INSTRUCTIONS 

- There are **forty** questions on this paper. Answer **all** questions. 

- For each question there are four possible answers **A** , **B** , **C** and **D**. Choose the **one** you consider correct     and record your choice in soft pencil on the multiple choice answer sheet. 

- Follow the instructions on the multiple choice answer sheet. 

- Write in soft pencil. 

- Write your name, centre number and candidate number on the multiple choice answer sheet in the     spaces provided unless this has been done for you. 

- Do **not** use correction fluid. 

- Do **not** write on any bar codes. 

- You may use a calculator. 

- Take the weight of 1.0 kg to be 10 N (acceleration of free fall = 10 m / s 2 ). 

 INFORMATION 

- The total mark for this paper is 40. 

- Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. 

- Any rough working should be done on this question paper. 


© UCLES 2020 0625/22/F/M/20 

**1** The diagram shows a rectangular metal sheet close to two rulers. 

### 0 

### 0 

### 10 

### 20 

### 30 

 cm^10 20 30 40 50 

 cm 

 metal sheet 

 What is the area of the metal sheet? 

 A 700 cm^2 B 875 cm^2 C 900 cm^2 D 1125 cm^2 

**2** A ball falls from rest through the air towards the ground. The diagram shows two forces acting on the ball. 

 air resistance 

 gravitational force 

 As the ball falls, the air resistance increases. 

 Which statement is correct? 

 A The acceleration of the ball decreases. 

 B The acceleration of the ball increases. 

 C The speed of the ball decreases. 

 D The gravitational force on the ball decreases. 


© UCLES 2020 0625/22/F/M/20 **[Turn over** 

**3** A compressed spring projects a ball horizontally in a vacuum chamber. 

 On the Earth, the ball reaches the chamber floor 4.0 m in front of the spring. 

 An identical experiment is done on the Moon. The gravitational field strength is lower on the Moon than on the Earth. 

 The experimental results on the Moon are compared with those on the Earth. 

 Which statement is correct? 

 A The horizontal speed is greater on the Moon and the ball hits the floor 4.0 m in front of the spring. 

 B The horizontal speed is greater on the Moon and the ball hits the floor more than 4.0 m in front of the spring. 

 C The horizontal speed is the same on the Moon and the ball hits the floor 4.0 m in front of the spring. 

 D The horizontal speed is the same on the Moon and the ball hits the floor more than 4.0 m in front of the spring. 

**4** Diagram 1 shows a piece of flexible material that contains many pockets of air. Diagram 2 shows the same piece of flexible material after it has been compressed so that its volume decreases. 

 diagram 1 (before compression) 

 diagram 2 (after compression) 

 What happens to the mass and to the weight of the flexible material when it is compressed? 

 mass weight 

 A increases increases 

 B increases no change 

 C no change increases 

 D no change no change 


© UCLES 2020 0625/22/F/M/20 

**5** The graph shows how the strength of the Earth’s gravitational field varies as the distance from the Earth’s surface increases. 

 strength of the Earth’s gravitational field 

 distance from the surface of the Earth 

### 0 

### 0 

 Which row describes the effect that this has on the mass and on the weight of an object as it moves further away from the Earth’s surface? 

 mass of object weight of object 

 A decreases decreases 

 B decreases unchanged 

 C unchanged decreases 

 D unchanged unchanged 

**6** A measuring cylinder contains 40 cm^3 of water. 

 A solid metal ball is dropped into the water and the water level rises to 56 cm^3. 

 The mass of the ball is 80 g. 

 What is the density of the metal from which the ball is made? 

 A 0.20 g / cm^3 B 1.4 g / cm^3 C 2.0 g / cm^3 D 5.0 g / cm^3 


© UCLES 2020 0625/22/F/M/20 **[Turn over** 

**7** A car travels along a horizontal road at constant speed. Three horizontal forces act on the car. The diagram shows two of these forces. 

 air resistance 300 N 

 force from engine 1500 N 

 direction of motion forwards 

 What is the size and the direction of the third horizontal force acting on the car? 

 A 1200 N backwards 

 B 1200 N forwards 

 C 1800 N backwards 

 D 1800 N forwards 

**8** A car is driven round a bend in the road at a constant speed. 

 car direction of the motion of the car 

 What is the direction of the resultant force on the car when it is going round the bend? 

 A parallel to the motion and in the same direction as the motion 

 B parallel to the motion and in the opposite direction to the motion 

 C perpendicular to the motion and towards the inside of the bend 

 D perpendicular to the motion and towards the outside of the bend 


© UCLES 2020 0625/22/F/M/20 

**9** An athlete with mass 70 kg trains by performing press-ups with a load on his back. The diagram shows the perpendicular distances involved. 

The centre of mass of the athlete is CM and the centre of mass of the load he is carrying is C (^) L. load 0.1 m 0.3 m 0.9 m CC (^) L (^) L CC (^) M (^) M The mass of the load is 6.0 kg. What is the upward force exerted by his two arms? **A** 54 N **B** 76 N **C** 540 N **D** 760 N **10** An air pistol fires a pellet forwards. What is the motion of the air pistol? **A** The air pistol moves backwards with speed greater than the pellet. **B** The air pistol moves backwards with speed less than the pellet. **C** The air pistol moves forward with speed greater than the pellet. **D** The air pistol moves forward with speed less than the pellet. **11** Which row describes an advantage and a disadvantage of wind turbines? advantage disadvantage **A** no fuel needed harmful gases released **B** variable supply fuel needed **C** no harmful gases released variable supply **D** constant supply noisy **12** An electric motor provides 900 J of useful output energy. The efficiency of the motor is 60 %. How much electrical energy is supplied to the motor? **A** 15 J **B** 540 J **C** 1500 J **D** 5400 J 


© UCLES 2020 0625/22/F/M/20 **[Turn over** 

**13** A crane takes 2.0 minutes to lift a 500 kg load to the top of a building that is 12 m high. 

 What is the useful power developed against gravity by the crane? 

 A 21 W B 50 W C 500 W D 30 000 W 

**14** A skier is standing still on a flat area of snow. 

 skis 

 The weight of the skier is 550 N. The total area of his skis in contact with the ground is 0.015 m^2. 

 What is the pressure exerted on the ground by the skier? 

 A 0.83 N / m^2 B 8.3 N / m^2 C 3700 N / m^2 D 37 000 N / m^2 


© UCLES 2020 0625/22/F/M/20 

**15** A tall cylinder is partly filled with two liquids which do not mix. The two liquids have different densities. A student measures the pressure due to the liquids at different depths. 

 position P 

 position Q 

 two liquids with different densities 

 Which graph shows how the liquid pressure varies between positions P and Q? 

 pressure pressure 

 depth depth 

### A B 

### P P 

### Q Q 

 pressure pressure 

 depth depth 

### C D 

### P 

### P 

### Q 

### Q 

**16** When pollen grains in water are viewed through a microscope, they are seen to be in continuous, rapid random motion. 

 What causes a pollen grain to move in this way? 

 A convection currents in the water 

 B bombardment by a single molecule of water 

 C uneven bombardment on different sides by water molecules 

 D collision with another pollen grain due to their kinetic energies 


© UCLES 2020 0625/22/F/M/20 **[Turn over** 

**17** A student measures the mass of warm water in an open container over two minutes. The container is kept at a constant temperature. The results are in the table. 

 time / minutes mass / g 

 0.0 33.9 

 0.5 30.6 

 1.0 27.6 

 1.5 24.9 

 2.0 22.5 

 Why does the mass of the water change? 

 A The water evaporates. 

 B The water freezes. 

 C The water condenses. 

 D The water boils. 

**18** Which points are the fixed points of the liquid-in-glass thermometer shown? 

 –10 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 °C 

 A the beginning and end points of the column of liquid 

 B the points marked –10 °C and 110^ °C 

 C the points marked 0 °C and 100 °C 

 D the top and bottom points of the thermometer bulb 


© UCLES 2020 0625/22/F/M/20 

**19** The specific heat capacities of aluminium, iron, ethanol and water are given. 

 substance 

 specific heat capacity J / kg °C 

 aluminium 900 

 iron 450 

 ethanol 2400 

 water 4200 

 1 kg of each metal is put into 5 kg of each liquid. 

 The starting temperature of each metal is 60 °C. The starting temperature of each liquid is 10 °C. 

 Which example has the highest final temperature? 

 metal liquid 

 A aluminium ethanol 

 B iron ethanol 

 C aluminium water 

 D iron water 

**20** Metals are good thermal conductors. 

 Insulators are poor thermal conductors. 

 Which description of the mechanism of thermal conductivity is correct? 

 A In insulators, conduction takes place by electron transfer and molecular vibrations. 

 B In insulators, conduction takes place by electron transfer only. 

 C In metals, conduction takes place by electron transfer and molecular vibrations. 

 D In metals, conduction takes place by electron transfer only. 


© UCLES 2020 0625/22/F/M/20 **[Turn over** 

**21** A teacher shows his class a polystyrene cup. The cup is made from thick plastic with lots of tiny air bubbles in it. 

 He asks the class why the cup is so good at keeping a hot drink warm. Three suggestions are made. 

 1 It contains air which is a poor thermal conductor. 

 2 The air is trapped in tiny bubbles so very little convection is possible. 

 3 The plastic is a poor thermal conductor. 

 Which suggestions are correct? 

 A 1 and 2 only B 1 and 3 only C 2 and 3 only D 1, 2 and 3 

**22** A boy jumps into an indoor swimming pool. He notices that the water appears to get colder as he goes deeper underwater. This is due to convection. 

 Which statement is correct? 

 A Cold water is more dense than warm water so it sinks to the bottom of the pool. 

 B Warm water is more dense than cold water so it rises to the surface of the pool. 

 C The molecules in cold water have more kinetic energy than the molecules in warm water so they move to the bottom of the pool faster. 

 D The molecules in warm water are closer together than the molecules in cold water so they rise to the surface of the pool. 

**23** Four students **A** , **B** , **C** and **D** , investigate the diffraction of water waves through a gap. 

 Each student uses a different gap size and a different wavelength for the water waves. 

 Which student produces the waves which have the most diffraction? 

 gap size / cm 

 wavelength / cm 

 A 2.0 1.8 

 B 3.0 2.1 

 C 4.0 2.0 

 D 5.0 0.9 


© UCLES 2020 0625/22/F/M/20 

**24** The diagrams show examples of wave motion. 

 1 2 

 waves on water waves in air 

 waves on a rope waves in a spring 

### 3 4 

 ripple tank 

 drum 

 Which waves are longitudinal? 

 A 1 only B 2 and 3 only C 2, 3 and 4 D 2 and 4 only 


© UCLES 2020 0625/22/F/M/20 **[Turn over** 

**25** Which diagram shows how the light from a candle is reflected by a mirror, and shows the position of the image formed? 

 eye 

 candle 

 image of candle 

### A 

 eye 

 candle 

 eye 

 candle 

 image of candle 

### B 

 image of candle 

### C D 

 eye 

 candle 

 image of candle 

 mirror 

 mirror 

 mirror 

 mirror 

**26** A converging lens can be used as a magnifying glass. 

 What will be the nature of the image? 

 A real, inverted, diminished 

 B real, upright, enlarged 

 C virtual, inverted, enlarged 

 D virtual, upright, enlarged 


© UCLES 2020 0625/22/F/M/20 

**27** The wavelength of blue light changes from 4.7 × 10 –7^ m to 3.5 × 10 –7^ m as it passes from air to water. 

 What is the speed of this light in water? 

 A 7.4 × 10 7 m / s 

 B 1.3 × 10 8 m / s 

 C 2.2 × 10 8 m / s 

 D 3.0 × 10 8 m / s 

**28** The diagram shows compressions and rarefactions in air as a sound wave moves from left to right. 

 rarefaction compression 

 A quieter sound of the same frequency is made. 

 What will happen to the number of particles in a region of rarefaction and in a region of compression? 

 number of particles in region of rarefaction 

 number of particles in region of compression 

 A decrease decrease 

 B decrease increase 

 C increase decrease 

 D increase increase 


© UCLES 2020 0625/22/F/M/20 **[Turn over** 

**29** The diagrams show three different metal rods P, Q and R, inside coils of wire. 

 Small iron nails are placed on a wooden bench under the rods. 

 Diagram 1 shows the situation when there are electric currents in the wires. 

 Diagram 2 shows the situation when the currents are switched off. 

### P 

 wooden bench 

 current in coils 

 diagram 1 Q R 

### P 

 no current in coils 

 diagram 2 Q R 

 wooden bench 

 Which row correctly identifies the metal rods? 

### P Q R 

 A copper soft iron steel 

 B soft iron copper steel 

 C steel soft iron copper 

 D copper steel soft iron 


© UCLES 2020 0625/22/F/M/20 

**30** Which row describes conventional current and electron flow in a circuit containing a cell? 

 conventional current electron flow 

 A from the negative terminal of the cell to the positive terminal of the cell 

 from the negative terminal of the cell to the positive terminal of the cell 

 B from the negative terminal of the cell to the positive terminal of the cell 

 from the positive terminal of the cell to the negative terminal of the cell 

 C from the positive terminal of the cell to the negative terminal of the cell 

 from the negative terminal of the cell to the positive terminal of the cell 

 D from the positive terminal of the cell to the negative terminal of the cell 

 from the positive terminal of the cell to the negative terminal of the cell 

**31** A student makes four resistors using different pieces of wire. The wires have different diameters and lengths. All the pieces of wire are made of the same material. 

 Which piece of wire will make the resistor with the largest resistance? 

 diameter / mm length / cm 

 A 0.8 10 

 B 0.8 17 

 C 2.0 10 

 D 2.0 17 

**32** A student is to determine the resistance of resistor R. She uses a circuit including a voltmeter and an ammeter. 

 Which circuit should be used? 

 A 

### V A 

### R 

### B 

### R 

### A 

### V 

### C 

### R 

### A 

### V 

### D 

### R 

### V 

### A 


© UCLES 2020 0625/22/F/M/20 **[Turn over** 

**33** The diagram shows a battery connected to two resistors. Three ammeters M 1 , M 2 and M 3 are connected in the circuit. 

M (^1) 

### M 2 

### A M 3 

### A 

### A 

 Ammeter M 1 reads 1.0 A. 

 What are the readings on M 2 and on M 3? 

 reading on M 2 / A 

 reading on M 3 / A 

 A 0.0 0.0 

 B 0.5 0.5 

 C 0.5 1.0 D 1.0 1.0 

**34** A cell is connected to a parallel combination of a 2.0 Ω resistor and a 4.0 Ω resistor. The current in the 4.0 Ω resistor is 1.0 A. 

### 2.0 Ω 

### 4.0 Ω 

### 1.0 A 

 What is the current in the cell? 

 A 1.0 A B 1.5 A C 2.0 A D 3.0 A 


© UCLES 2020 0625/22/F/M/20 

**35** The two inputs of a NAND gate are joined together. 

 input output 

 Which truth table represents the action of this gate? 

 A B C D 

 input output input output input output input output 

 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 

 1 0 1 0 1 1 1 1 

**36** The diagram shows a transformer that has an output voltage of 12 V. 

 240 V a.c. input 

 12 V a.c. output 

 primary coil with 1000 turns 

 secondary coil 

 soft iron core 

 How many turns of wire are in the secondary coil? 

 A 12 B 20 C 50 D 20 000 


© UCLES 2020 0625/22/F/M/20 **[Turn over** 

**37** The diagrams show different particles moving through a magnetic field. 

 Which particle experiences a magnetic force acting up out of the plane of the paper? 

 A 

 proton 

 proton 

### B 

### C D 

 electron 

 electron 

**38** When Rutherford bombarded thin gold foil with α-particles, he found that some α-particles were deflected through large angles. 

 Which statement explains this deflection? 

 A Most of the atom consists of empty space. 

 B All of the positive charge and most of the mass of the gold atom are concentrated in a small volume. 

 C Positive charge in the gold atom is spread evenly throughout the atom. 

 D All of the negative charge is concentrated at its centre. 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2020 0625/22/F/M/20 

**39** The diagram shows the path followed by α-particles as they pass between two charged plates. They are deflected downwards. 

 + + + + + + + + + 

### – – – – – – – – – 

 α-particles 

 β-particles 

 What happens to β-particles passing through the same electric field? 

 A They are deflected downwards more than the α-particles. 

 B They are deflected upwards. 

 C They are not deflected at all. 

 D They are deflected downwards by the same amount as the α-particles. 

**40** The graph shows the count rate from a radioactive source over a period of time. 

### 2000 

### 1500 

### 1000 

### 500 

### 0 

### 0 1 2 3 

 time / hours 

 count rate counts / s 

 What is the half-life of the source? 

 A 0.5 hour B 1.0 hour C 1.5 hours D 3.0 hours 


