 This document consists of 16 printed pages. 

 DC (SLM) 115230 © UCLES 2015 [Turn over 

 UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE INTERNATIONAL EXAMINATIONS International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

* 8 9 4 7 2 6 6 4 7 2 * 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/12 Paper 1 October/November 2015 2 hours Candidates answer on the Question Paper. Additional Materials: Electronic calculator 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all the questions. Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place in the case of angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. The use of an electronic calculator is expected, where appropriate. You are reminded of the need for clear presentation in your answers. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. The total number of marks for this paper is 80. 


© UCLES 2015 0606/12/O/N/15 

 Mathematical Formulae 

**1. ALGEBRA** 

_Quadratic Equation_ 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

 x a 

 b b ac 2 

### = -^!^2 -^4. 

_Binomial Theorem_ 

( _a_ + _b_ ) _n_^ = _an_^ + (^) ( _n_ 

# 1 ) a 

_n_ –1 (^) _b_ + 

# ( 

 n 

# 2 ) a 

_n_ –2 (^) _b_ (^2) + … + 

# ( 

 n 

# r ) a 

_n_ – _r_ (^) _br_ (^) + … + _bn_ , where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( _n_ 

# r ) =^ 

 n! ( n – r )! r! 

### . 

**2. TRIGONOMETRY** 

_Identities_ 

 sin^2 A + cos^2 A = 1 

 sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A 

 cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

_Formulae for_ ∆ _ABC_ 

 a sin A =^ 

 b sin B =^ 

 c sin C 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

 ∆ = 1 2 

 bc sin A 


© UCLES 2015 0606/12/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

**1** Find the range of values of _k_ for which the equation _kx_^2 + _k_ = 8 _x_ 2 _xk_ has 2 real distinct roots. [4] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/12/O/N/15 

**2** A curve, showing the relationship between two variables _x_ and _y_ , passes through the point _P_ ^1 3, h. 

 The curve has a gradient of 2 at P. Given that d 

 d x 

 y 2 5 

 2 =, find the equation of the curve. [4] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/12/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

**3** Show that sec 2 _i_ 1 + cosec 2 _i_ 1 = sec _i_ cosec _i_. [5] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/12/O/N/15 

**4 (a)** 6 books are to be chosen from 8 different books. 

 (i) Find the number of different selections of 6 books that could be made. [1] 

 A clock is to be displayed on a shelf with 3 of the 8 different books on each side of it. Find the number of ways this can be done if 

 (ii) there are no restrictions on the choice of books, [1] 

 (iii) 3 of the 8 books are music books which have to be kept together. [2] 

 (b) A team of 6 tennis players is to be chosen from 10 tennis players consisting of 7 men and 3 women. Find the number of different teams that could be chosen if the team must include at least 1 woman. [3] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/12/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

**5** Variables _x_ and _y_ are such that _y_ = ^ _x_ 3 h ln^ 2 _x_ 2 + 1 h. 

 (i) Find the value of d 

 d x 

 y when x = 2. [4] 

 (ii) Hence find the approximate change in y when x changes from 2 to 2.03. [2] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/12/O/N/15 

**6** It is given that  = " _x_ | 1 G _x_ G 12 , where _x_ is an integer, and that sets _A_ , _B_ , _C_ and _D_ are such that 

 A = "multiples of 3^ ,, B = "prime numbers^ ,, C = "odd integers ,, D = "even integers^ ,. 

 Write down the following sets in terms of their elements. 

 (i) A + B [1] 

 (ii) A , C [1] 

 (iii) A l + C [1] 

 (iv) ^ D^ , B hl^ [1] 

 (v) Write down a set E such that E 1 D. [1] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/12/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

**7** Two variables, _x_ and _y_ , are such that _y_ = _Ax b_ , where _A_ and _b_ are constants. When ln _y_ is plotted against ln _x_ , a straight line graph is obtained which passes through the points ^1 4 5 8^. ,. h^ and ^2 2 6 0^. , .h. 

 (i) Find the value of A and of b. [4] 

 (ii) Calculate the value of y when x = 5. [2] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/12/O/N/15 

**8** Find the equation of the tangent to the curve _y x_ 

 x 5 

### 2 1 

= (^2) + (^) at the point where _x_ = 2. [7] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/12/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

**9 You are not allowed to use a calculator in this question.** 

## (i) Find y 4 + x d x. [2] 

 (ii) 

### A 

### B 

 y = √4 + x 

 y 

_O_ (^5) _x_ The diagram shows the graph of _y_ = 4 + _x_ , which meets the _y_ -axis at the point _A_ and the line _x_ = 5 at the point _B_. Using your answer to part **(i)** , find the area of the region enclosed by the curve and the straight line _AB_. [5] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/12/O/N/15 

**10** 

### A E 

### D 

### B 

### C 

 10 cm 

 The diagram shows two circles, centres A and B , each of radius 10 cm. The point B lies on the circumference of the circle with centre A. The two circles intersect at the points C and D. The point E lies on the circumference of the circle centre B such that ABE is a diameter. 

 (i) Explain why triangle ABC is equilateral. [1] 

 (ii) Write down, in terms of r , angle CBE. [1] 

 (iii) Find the perimeter of the shaded region. [5] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/12/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

 (iv) Find the area of the shaded region. [3] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/12/O/N/15 

**11 (a)** A function f is such that f ^ h _x_ = _x_^2 + 6 _x_ + 4 for _x_ H 0. 

 (i) Show that x^2 + 6 x + 4 can be written in the form ^ x + a h^2 + b , where a and b are integers. [2] 

 (ii) Write down the range of f. [1] 

 (iii) Find f -^1 and state its domain. [3] 


© UCLES 2015 0606/12/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

 (b) Functions g and h are such that, for x d R, 

 g ^ h x =e x and h ^ h x = 5 x + 2. 

 Solve h g^2 ^ h x = 37. [4] 

 Question 12 is printed on the next page. 


© UCLES 2015 0606/12/O/N/15 

**12** The line 2 _x_ _y_ + 1 = 0 meets the curve _x_^2 + 3 _y_ = 19 at the points _A_ and _B_. The perpendicular bisector of the line _AB_ meets the _x_ -axis at the point _C_. Find the area of the triangle _ABC_. [9] 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 


