® IGCSE is the registered trademark of Cambridge International Examinations. 

### CAMBRIDGE INTERNATIONAL EXAMINATIONS 

Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## MARK SCHEME for the October/November 2015 series 

# 0625 PHYSICS 

## 0625/62 Paper 6 (Alternative to Practical), maximum raw mark 40 

This mark scheme is published as an aid to teachers and candidates, to indicate the requirements of the examination. It shows the basis on which Examiners were instructed to award marks. It does not indicate the details of the discussions that took place at an Examiners’ meeting before marking began, which would have considered the acceptability of alternative answers. 

Mark schemes should be read in conjunction with the question paper and the Principal Examiner Report for Teachers. 

Cambridge will not enter into discussions about these mark schemes. 

Cambridge is publishing the mark schemes for the October/November 2015 series for most Cambridge IGCSE®, Cambridge International A and AS Level components and some Cambridge O Level components. 


 Cambridge IGCSE – October/November 2015 0625 62 

 NOTES ABOUT MARK SCHEME SYMBOLS AND OTHER MATTERS 

Brackets ( ) around words or units in the mark scheme are intended to indicate wording used to clarify the mark scheme, but the marks do not depend on seeing the words or units in brackets, e.g. 10 (J) means that the mark is scored for 10, regardless of the unit given. 

c.a.o. means "correct answer only". 

e.c.f. means "error carried forward". This indicates that if a candidate has made an earlier mistake and has carried his incorrect value forward to subsequent stages of working, he or she may be given marks indicated by e.c.f. provided his or her subsequent working is correct, bearing in mind his or her earlier mistake. This prevents a candidate being penalised more than once for a particular mistake, but only applies to marks annotated "e.c.f." 

owtte means “or words to that effect” 

Underlining indicates that this must be seen in the answer offered, or something very similar. 

OR indicates alternative answers, any one of which is satisfactory for scoring the mark. 

AND indicates that both answers are required to score the mark. 

Spelling Be generous about spelling and use of English. However, do not allow ambiguities, e.g. spelling which suggests confusion between reflection / refraction / diffraction or thermistor / transistor / transformer. 

Significant Answers are generally acceptable to any number of significant figures ≥ 2, except where figures the mark scheme specifies otherwise. 

Fractions These are only acceptable where specified. 

NOT indicates that an incorrect answer is not to be disregarded, but cancels another otherwise correct alternative offered by the candidate. i.e. right plus wrong penalty applies. 


 Cambridge IGCSE – October/November 2015 0625 62 

1 (a)(i)(ii) x = 40 mm / 4(.0) cm AND y = 19 mm / 1.9 cm both with correct unit [1] 

 (iii) 40(.0) AND 19(.0) in first line of table [1] 

 (b) graph: 

- axes both correctly labelled, right way round and with units [1] 

- suitable scales [1] 

- all plots correct to within ½ small square [1] 

- good best-fit line judgement, single, thin, continuous line [1] 

 (c) triangle method using at least half candidate’s line, shown on graph [1] 

 G = 0.41–0.52 (2–3 sig. figs. only) [1] 

 (d) P = 20–500 g [1] Q = 2 × P (exactly) OR Q = P/G [1] 

 [Total: 10] 

2 (a) θ 1 = 82 (°C) [1] 

 (b) (i) s, °C, °C [1] 

 (ii) 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60 [1] 

 (c)(i)(ii) ∆θ 1 = 39 (°C) AND ∆θ 2 = 8 (°C) [1] 

 (iii) temperature θ 2 at time t = 0 less than θ 1 [1] 

 (d) view thermometer at right angles [1] 

 (e) any one from: 

- room temperature / other environmental factor 

- volume / mass / quantity / amount of hot water 

- initial temperature of the hot water 

- initial temperature of the cold water 

- initial temperature of the water [1] 

 [Total: 7] 


 Cambridge IGCSE – October/November 2015 0625 62 

3 (a) (i) V 1 = 2(.0) (V) [1] I 1 = 0.32 (A) [1] 

 (ii) R 1 = 6.25 (Ω) OR e.c.f. (i) AND correct units V, A, Ω in (i) and (ii) [1] 

 (b) correct arrangement of resistors [1] correct position for voltmeter AND correct circuit symbols AND correct labelling of resistors A, B and C [1] 

 (c) (i) 3.0 / 3.04 / 3.043 (Ω) [1] 

 (ii) 2.1 / 2.05 / 2.06 / 2.07 / 2.08 OR e.c.f. AND no unit [1] 

 (d) statement matches results [1] justification including the idea of within (or beyond) the limits of experimental accuracy [1] 

 [Total: 9] 

4 (a)(i)(ii) ray-trace: 

- normal drawn at centre of MR [1] 

- incident ray at 30° (± 1°) [1] 

- incident ray 8.0 cm long [1] 

 (b) P 1 P 2 distance ⩾ 5 cm apart [1] 

 (c) (i) all lines correctly drawn AND all lines single, thin, continuous lines [1] 

 (ii) r = 27(°)–30(°) [1] 

 (d) any two from: 

- ensure pins are vertical / view bases of pins 

- pins far apart (or ⩾ 5 cm) 

- thin lines / sharp pencil / thin pins [2] 

 (e) any one from: 

- thickness of mirror / mirror glass silvered at back surface 

- thickness of pins 

- difficulty in lining up pins (and their images exactly) [1] 

 [Total: 9] 


 Cambridge IGCSE – October/November 2015 0625 62 

5 (a) (human) reaction time [1] 

 (b) ruler or metre rule [1] repeat for different diameters around the hole [1] 

 (c) any two from: 

- size / mass / weight / volume / diameter / density of ball 

- size of the sand grains / type of sand / nature of the sand 

- dampness / depth of sand [2] 

 [Total: 5] 


