 This document consists of 14 printed pages and 2 blank pages. 

 DC (CW/SW) 96029/2 © UCLES 2015 [Turn over 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

* 7 0 0 2 0 3 2 5 2 2 * 

 PHYSICS 0625/62 Paper 6 Alternative to Practical October/November 2015 1 hour Candidates answer on the Question Paper. No Additional Materials are required. 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in. Write in dark blue or black pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 Answer all questions. 

 Electronic calculators may be used. You may lose marks if you do not show your working or if you do not use appropriate units. 

 At the end of the examination, fasten all your work securely together. The number of marks is given in brackets [ ] at the end of each question or part question. 

 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 


© UCLES 2015 0625/62/O/N/15 

**1** The class is investigating the masses of two loads, **P** and **Q**. 

 Fig. 1.1 shows the apparatus. 

## P Q 

 bench 

 metre rule 

 pivot 

 Fig. 1.1 

 (a) A student places the metre rule on the pivot at the 50.0 cm mark. 

 He places the load P on the metre rule. He then places the load Q on the metre rule and adjusts its position so that the metre rule is as near as possible to being balanced. 

 (i) On Fig. 1.1, measure the distance x from the centre of load P to the pivot. 

 x = ............................................................... 

 (ii) On Fig. 1.1, measure the distance y from the pivot to the centre of load Q. 

 y = ............................................................... [1] 

 (iii) Fig. 1.1 is drawn 1/10th full size. 

 Calculate the actual distance a from the centre of load P to the pivot. Calculate the actual distance b from the pivot to the centre of load Q. Write the results in Table 1.1. [1] 

 Table 1.1 

 a / cm b / cm 

## 35.0 17.6 

## 30.0 14.8 

## 25.0 12.7 

## 20.0 10.1 


© UCLES 2015 0625/62/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

 (b) The student repeats the procedure using different positions of P. His readings are shown in the table. 

 Plot a graph of b / cm ( y -axis) against a / cm ( x -axis). 

## [4] 

 (c) Determine the gradient G of the graph. Show clearly on the graph how you obtained the necessary information. 

## G = ...........................................................[2] 

 (d) The gradient G is the ratio of the masses of the two loads P and Q. 

 Suggest a suitable value for the mass of P in this experiment. Use this, and your value for G , to determine an estimate for the mass of Q. 

 estimated mass of P = ............................................................... 

 estimated mass of Q = ............................................................... [2] 

 [Total: 10] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/62/O/N/15 

**2** The class is investigating the cooling of a thermometer bulb. 

 Figs. 2.1 and 2.2 show the apparatus. 

 thermometer 

 stand 

 beaker 

 thermometer 

 water 

 Fig. 2.1 Fig. 2.2 

 (a) In the space in Table 2.1, record the temperature θ 1 of the hot water as shown on the thermometer in Fig. 2.3. 

## [1] 

 Fig. 2.3 


© UCLES 2015 0625/62/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

 (b) A student removes the thermometer from the beaker of hot water, as shown in Fig. 2.2. She immediately starts a stopclock, and records the temperature θ 1 every 10 s for 1 minute. The temperature readings are shown in Table 2.1. 

 Table 2.1 

 t / θ 1 / θ 2 / 

 0 33 

 72 30 

 65 28 

 59 27 

 53 26 

 48 26 

 43 25 

 She then adds 100 cm 3 of cold water to the water in the beaker and repeats the procedure. She records the temperature readings in the θ 2 column of the table. 

 (i) Complete the column headings in the table. 

 (ii) Record the time readings in the table. [2] 

 (c) (i) Using the readings in the θ 1 column of the table, calculate the decrease in temperature Δθ 1 in 60 s. 

 Δθ 1 = ............................................................... 

 (ii) Using the readings in the θ 2 column of the table, calculate the decrease in temperature Δθ 2 in 60 s. 

 Δθ 2 = ............................................................... 

 (iii) State the reason why Δθ 2 is less than Δθ 1. 

 ........................................................................................................................................... 

 ........................................................................................................................................... [2] 

 (d) State a precaution that you would take when reading the thermometer scale in order to obtain reliable readings. 

 ...............................................................................................................................................[1] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/62/O/N/15 

 (e) Suggest one reason why other students, carrying out this experiment with care, might obtain values of Δθ 1 and Δθ 2 different from the values in part (c). 

 ................................................................................................................................................... 

 ...............................................................................................................................................[1] 

 [Total: 7] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/62/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

**3** The class is investigating the combined resistance of resistors in series and parallel arrangements. 

 The circuit is shown in Fig. 3.1. 

## A 

## V 

 power supply 

## X 

**A B** (^) **Y C Fig. 3.1 (a) (i)** Record the potential difference _V_ 1 across the resistors and the current _I_ 1 in the circuit, as shown in Figs. 3.2 and 3.3. 

## V 

## 3 

## 1 2 

## 0 

 Fig. 3.2 

 V 1 = ............................................................... 

## A 

## 0.6 

## 0.8 

## 1.0 

## 0.4 

## 0.2 

## 0 

 Fig. 3.3 

 I 1 = ............................................................... [2] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/62/O/N/15 

 (ii) Calculate the combined resistance R 1 of the resistors using the equation R 1 = 

## V 1 

## I 1 

## . 

## R 1 = ...........................................................[1] 

 (b) A student rearranges the circuit shown in Fig. 3.1. He follows these instructions: 

- Disconnect resistors **A** and **B**. 

- Connect together the resistors **A** and **B** in parallel. 

- Connect one side of this parallel combination to the resistor **C** at the point labelled **Y** in     Fig. 3.1. 

- Connect the other side of the parallel combination to the point labelled **X** in Fig. 3.1. 

- Do not make any other changes to the circuit. 

 On Fig. 3.4, complete the diagram of this new circuit using standard circuit symbols. 

## A 

 power supply 

## X 

 Fig. 3.4 [2] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/62/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

 (c) Using the new circuit, a student measures the potential difference V 2 across the three resistors and the current I 2 in the circuit. 

_V_ 2 = (^) ................................................................2.1 V _I_ 2 = (^) ................................................................0.69 A **(i)** Calculate the combined resistance _R_ 2 of the resistors using the equation _R_ 2 = 

## V 2 

## I 2 

## . 

## R 2 = ............................................................... 

 (ii) Calculate the ratio 

## R 1 

## R 2 

## . 

## R 1 

## R 2 

## = ............................................................... 

## [2] 

 (d) R 1 should equal 2 × R 2 when all three resistors are identical. 

 State whether the results indicate that the resistors are identical. Justify your answer by reference to the results. 

 statement .................................................................................................................................. 

 justification ................................................................................................................................ 

 ................................................................................................................................................... 

 ................................................................................................................................................... [2] 

 [Total: 9] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/62/O/N/15 

**4** The class is investigating reflection using a plane mirror. 

 Fig. 4.1 shows a student’s ray-trace sheet. 

## M R 

 ray-trace^ eye sheet 

## P 3 

## P 4 

 Fig. 4.1 

 (a) The student draws the line MR to mark the position of a plane mirror. 

 (i) On Fig. 4.1, draw a normal to this line that passes through its centre. Label the normal NL. Label the point at which NL crosses MR with the letter A. 

 (ii) Draw a line 8.0 cm long from A at an angle of incidence i = 30 ° to the normal, below MR and to the left of the normal. Label the end of this line B. [3] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/62/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

 (b) The student places a pin P 1 at point B. She places a second pin P 2 on line AB. 

 Label a position X on line AB to show a suitable position for pin P 2. [1] 

 (c) She views the images of pins P 1 and P 2 from the direction indicated by the eye in Fig. 4.1. She places two pins P 3 and P 4 , some distance apart, so that pins P 3 and P 4 , and the images of P 2 and P 1 , all appear exactly one behind the other. The positions of P 3 and P 4 are shown in Fig. 4.1. 

 (i) Draw the line joining the positions of P 3 and P 4. Extend the line until it meets NL. 

 (ii) Measure the angle r between NL and the line joining the positions of P 3 and P 4. 

 r = ............................................................... [2] 

 (d) State two precautions that you would take with the pins in this experiment in order to obtain reliable readings. 

1. ............................................................................................................................................... 

 ................................................................................................................................................... 

2.. .............................................................................................................................................. 

 ................................................................................................................................................... [2] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/62/O/N/15 

 (e) The student turns the ray-trace sheet through 180 °. She draws a line AC at an angle of incidence i = 30 ° to the normal, below MR and to the right of the normal. 

 She repeats the procedure described in parts (b) and (c). Her ray-trace is shown in Fig. 4.2. 

## R M 

## N 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## L 

 eye 

 ray-trace sheet 

 reflecting surface 

 Fig. 4.2 

 She carried out the experiment very carefully. She expected that the results would show all the incident rays and reflected rays meeting at point A. 

 Suggest a practical reason why the lines may not meet exactly at point A. 

 ................................................................................................................................................... 

 ...............................................................................................................................................[1] 

 [Total: 9] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/62/O/N/15 **[Turn over** 

**5** The class is investigating the motion of a small steel ball when it is dropped on to a tray full of sand. Fig. 5.1 shows the apparatus. 

 steel ball 

 sand 

 Fig. 5.1 

 (a) A student is measuring the time it takes for the steel ball to fall through 2.00 m on to the sand. He uses a stopwatch. 

 Suggest a cause of inaccuracy in the timing. 

 ................................................................................................................................................... 

 ...............................................................................................................................................[1] 

 (b) When the steel ball falls into the sand it creates a circular hole. 

 Suggest how you would measure the diameter of the hole as reliably as possible. Name the measuring device that you would use. You may draw a diagram. 

## ................................................................................................................................................... 

## ................................................................................................................................................... 

## ...............................................................................................................................................[2] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/62/O/N/15 

 (c) The student suggests that the diameter of the hole depends on the height from which the ball is dropped, because this affects the speed. 

 Suggest two other variables on which the size of the hole may depend. 

1. ............................................................................................................................................... 

2. ...............................................................................................................................................     [2] 

 [Total: 5] 


© UCLES 2015 0625/62/O/N/15 

## BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2015 0625/62/O/N/15 

## BLANK PAGE 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 


