® IGCSE is the registered trademark of Cambridge International Examinations. 

### CAMBRIDGE INTERNATIONAL EXAMINATIONS 

Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## MARK SCHEME for the October/November 2015 series 

# 0625 PHYSICS 

## 0625/52 Paper 5 (Practical), maximum raw mark 40 

This mark scheme is published as an aid to teachers and candidates, to indicate the requirements of the examination. It shows the basis on which Examiners were instructed to award marks. It does not indicate the details of the discussions that took place at an Examiners’ meeting before marking began, which would have considered the acceptability of alternative answers. 

Mark schemes should be read in conjunction with the question paper and the Principal Examiner Report for Teachers. 

Cambridge will not enter into discussions about these mark schemes. 

Cambridge is publishing the mark schemes for the October/November 2015 series for most Cambridge IGCSE®, Cambridge International A and AS Level components and some Cambridge O Level components. 


 Cambridge IGCSE – October/November 2015 0625 52 

 NOTES ABOUT MARK SCHEME SYMBOLS AND OTHER MATTERS 

Brackets ( ) around words or units in the mark scheme are intended to indicate wording used to clarify the mark scheme, but the marks do not depend on seeing the words or units in brackets, e.g. 10 (J) means that the mark is scored for 10, regardless of the unit given. 

c.a.o. means "correct answer only". 

e.c.f. means "error carried forward". This indicates that if a candidate has made an earlier mistake and has carried his incorrect value forward to subsequent stages of working, he or she may be given marks indicated by e.c.f. provided his or her subsequent working is correct, bearing in mind his or her earlier mistake. This prevents a candidate being penalised more than once for a particular mistake, but only applies to marks annotated "e.c.f." 

owtte means “or words to that effect” 

Underlining indicates that this must be seen in the answer offered, or something very similar. 

OR indicates alternative answers, any one of which is satisfactory for scoring the mark. 

AND indicates that both answers are required to score the mark. 

Spelling Be generous about spelling and use of English. However, do not allow ambiguities, e.g. spelling which suggests confusion between reflection / refraction / diffraction or thermistor / transistor / transformer. 

Significant Answers are generally acceptable to any number of significant figures ≥ 2, except where figures the mark scheme specifies otherwise. 

Fractions These are only acceptable where specified. 

NOT indicates that an incorrect answer is not to be disregarded, but cancels another otherwise correct alternative offered by the candidate. i.e. right plus wrong penalty applies. 


 Cambridge IGCSE – October/November 2015 0625 52 

1 (a)(b) correct a values 40.(0), 35.(0), 30.(0), 25.(0), 20.(0) [1] b values 20.0, 17.5, 15.0, 12.5, 10.0 all with tolerance ± 1.0 cm all b values given to 1 mm / 1 d.p. [1] 

 (c) graph: 

- axes correctly labelled [1] 

- suitable scales [1] 

- all plots correct to ½ small square [1] 

- good best-fit line judgement, single, thin, continuous line [1] 

 (d) triangle method using at least half drawn line, shown on graph [1] G = 0.42–0.54 (2–3 sig. figs. only) [1] 

 (e) P = 20–200 g [1] Q ≈ 2 × P OR Q = P / G [1] 

 [Total: 10] 

2 (a) sensible value for first hot water temperature θ 1 [1] 

 (b) table: 

- s, °C, °C [1] 

- t values 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60 [1] 

- temperatures in both columns decreasing and to 1 °C [1] 

 (c) (i) sensible value for first θ 2 temperature AND less than final temperature in θ 1 column [1] 

 (ii)(iii) see (b) 

 (d)(i)(ii) correct calculation of ∆θ 1 and ∆θ 2 (°C) [1] ∆θ 1 > ∆θ 2 [1] 

 (iii) lower temperatures / closer to room temperature / lower starting temperature [1] 

 (e) any one from: 

- view thermometer at right angles / at eye level 

- turn thermometer so scale crosses thermometer thread 

- take reading quickly / get ready so reading is exactly on time 

- position stopclock close to thermometer [1] 


 Cambridge IGCSE – October/November 2015 0625 52 

 (f) any one from: 

- room temperature / other environmental factor 

- volume / mass / quantity / amount of hot water 

- initial temperature of hot water 

- initial temperature of cold water [1] 

 [Total: 10] 

3 (a) (i) V 1 to at least 1 d.p. AND < 3 (V) [1] I 1 to at least 2 d.p. AND < 1.0 (A) [1] 

 (ii) correct calculation of R 1 (ignore unit) [1] 

 (b) correct arrangement of resistors [1] correct position for voltmeter [1] 

 (c) (i) V 2 and I 2 recorded, I 2 > I 1 [1] 

 (ii) R 2 recorded AND correct units V, A, Ω seen in (a) or (c) and not contradicted [1] 

 (iii) correct ratio, no unit and in range 1.8–2.2 [1] 

 (d) statement matches results [1] justification including the idea of within (or beyond) the limits of experimental accuracy [1] 

 [Total: 10] 

4(a)–(g) ray-trace: 

- normal drawn at centre of MR [1] 

- first incident ray at 30° (±1°) [1] 

- first P 1 P 2 distance at least 5 cm apart [1] 

- both reflected rays in correct positions [1] 

- all lines correctly drawn and all lines single, thin, continuous lines [1] 

 (h)(l) table: 

- r values correct to 1° (from trace) [1] 

- r values = 28–32 [1] 

 (i) any two from: 

- ensure pins are vertical / align pins by viewing bases of pins 

- pins as far apart as possible (> 5 cm) 

- thin lines / sharp pencil / thin pins [2] 

 (m) any one from: 

- thickness of mirror / mirror glass silvered at back surface 

- thickness of pins 

- difficulty in exactly lining up pins and their images [1] 

 [Total: 10] 


