 This syllabus is regulated for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 16 printed pages. 

 IB19 11_0610_13/5RP © UCLES 2019 [Turn over 

# *4648689599* 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## BIOLOGY 0610/13 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) October/November 2019 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2019 0610/13/O/N/19 

**1** The diagrams show a plant at the start of an experiment, and the same plant two weeks later. 

 start of experiment after two weeks 

 light from one side 

 Which characteristics of living organisms are demonstrated by this experiment? 

 A excretion, growth, movement 

 B excretion, movement, reproduction 

 C growth, movement, sensitivity 

 D sensitivity, growth, respiration 

**2** Donkeys and zebras are different species. They can breed to produce an animal called a zedonk. 

 Zedonks are not fertile. 

 Which statement is correct? 

 A Zedonks and donkeys are the same species. 

 B Zedonks and zebras are the same species. 

 C Zedonks are a species. 

 D Zedonks are not a species. 

**3** Which feature is characteristic only of birds? 

 A hair and wings 

 B hard-shelled eggs and feathers 

 C scales and soft-shelled eggs 

 D wings and soft-shelled eggs 


© UCLES 2019 0610/13/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**4** Which features do animal cells share with plant cells? 

 chloroplast cytoplasm nucleus 

 A    key 

 B     = yes 

 C     = no 

 D    

**5** The diagram shows an animal. 

 Use the key to identify the animal. 

 1 wings present ........................................ go to 2 

 wings absent ......................................... go to 3 

 2 one pair of wings visible ........................ A 

 two pairs of wings visible ....................... B 

 3 three pairs of legs .................................. C 

 four pairs of legs .................................... D 

**6** At which level of organisation is a root? 

 A organ 

 B organ system 

 C organism 

 D tissue 

**7** Which process requires energy from respiration? 

 A active transport 

 B diffusion 

 C osmosis 

 D transpiration 


© UCLES 2019 0610/13/O/N/19 

**8** Which identifies the chemical elements found in proteins? 

 carbon hydrogen oxygen nitrogen 

 A     key 

 B     = present 

 C     = absent 

 D     

**9** Enzyme X digests protein in the stomach. 

 Four test-tubes were set up, each contained the same amounts of protein and enzyme X. The test-tubes are kept at different levels of pH and temperature, as shown in the table. 

 In which test-tube will protein digestion be quickest? 

 pH temperature / °C 

 A 2 20 

 B 2 35 

 C 7 20 

 D 7 35 

**10** Which substance is used up in photosynthesis? 

 A chlorophyll 

 B light 

 C oxygen 

 D water 


© UCLES 2019 0610/13/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**11** The diagram shows a leaf as seen in cross-section under the microscope. 

## 1 

## 2 

## 3 

 What are tissues 1, 2 and 3? 

## 1 2 3 

 A epidermis palisade mesophyll spongy mesophyll 

 B epidermis spongy mesophyll palisade mesophyll 

 C palisade mesophyll epidermis spongy mesophyll 

 D spongy mesophyll palisade mesophyll epidermis 

**12** The pie charts show the composition of 100 g of four different foods. 

 Which food provides the most energy? 

 key carbohydrate 

 fats and oils 

 protein 

 water 

## A B C D 

**13** In which part of the alimentary canal is most water absorbed? 

 A colon 

 B oesophagus 

 C small intestine 

 D stomach 


© UCLES 2019 0610/13/O/N/19 

**14** The diagram shows an experiment kept at room temperature. 

 tubing containing starch, protease, protein and simple sugars 

 membrane permeable to small molecules only 

 distilled water 

 test-tube 

 What is present in the water surrounding the membrane after 45 minutes? 

 A amino acids and simple sugars 

 B protein and amino acids 

 C protein and simple sugars 

 D starch and simple sugars 

**15** The diagram shows a cross-section through a plant root. 

## Q 

## R 

 What is found at Q and R? 

## Q R 

 A palisade mesophyll spongy mesophyll 

 B phloem xylem 

 C spongy mesophyll palisade mesophyll 

 D xylem phloem 


© UCLES 2019 0610/13/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**16** The diagram shows a vertical section through a human heart. 

## Y 

## X 

 What are X and Y? 

## X Y 

 A left atrium right ventricle 

 B left ventricle right atrium 

 C right atrium left ventricle 

 D right ventricle left atrium 

**17** The table shows the concentration of red blood cells, white blood cells and platelets in the blood of four patients. 

 Which patient is most likely to have a deficiency of iron in their diet and will find it difficult to form a blood clot? 

 red blood cells / cells per mm^3 

 white blood cells / cells per mm^3 

 platelets / cells per mm^3 

 A 2 525 000 643 296 000 

 B 2 275 000 756 27 500 

 C 7 250 000 650 275 000 

 D 7 325 000 405 25 000 


© UCLES 2019 0610/13/O/N/19 

**18** _Campylobacter_ is a bacterium that can cause food poisoning. 

 Which word describes Campylobacter? 

 A antibody 

 B disease 

 C pathogen 

 D symptom 

**19** What is the sequence of structures through which a molecule of oxygen passes from the air to the blood of a person? 

 1 bronchiole 

 2 capillary 

 3 alveolus wall 

 4 larynx 

 A 1 → 4 → 2 → 3 

 B 3 → 2 → 1 → 4 

 C 4 → 1 → 3 → 2 

 D 4 → 2 → 1 → 3 

**20** Which process releases heat to maintain a constant body temperature? 

 A excretion 

 B nutrition 

 C reproduction 

 D respiration 

**21** Which process releases the most energy from one molecule of glucose? 

 A aerobic respiration 

 B anaerobic respiration in muscle 

 C anaerobic respiration in yeast 

 D photosynthesis 


© UCLES 2019 0610/13/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**22** The diagram shows a simple reflex arc. 

## 1 

 motor neurone activated 

## 2 

 sensory neurone activated 

## 3 

 muscle stimulated 4 receptor stimulated 

 knee tapped here 

 What is the correct order of events after the knee is tapped? 

 A 1 → 2 → 3 → 4 

 B 1 → 4 → 2 → 3 

 C 4 → 2 → 1 → 3 

 D 4 → 3 → 2 → 1 

**23** When a bright light is shone into the eye, the diameter of the pupil decreases. 

 What is this an example of? 

 A a simple reflex 

 B ‘fight or flight’ response 

 C a synapse 

 D refraction 


© UCLES 2019 0610/13/O/N/19 

**24** The diagram shows a seedling, fixed to a rotating platform. Light is directed from one side only. 

 light 

 rotates four times per hour 

 shoot of seedling 

 damp cotton wool 

 The platform was allowed to rotate for two days. It was left stationary for a further two days. 

 Which diagram shows the appearance of the seedling after this four-day period? 

 A B C D 


© UCLES 2019 0610/13/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**25** A patient has dye injected into the blood supply to his kidneys. The dye appears in his excretory system as shown. 

 key dye 

 no dye 

 Which part is blocked? 

 A the kidney 

 B the ureter 

 C the bladder 

 D the urethra 

**26** Which organ breaks down alcohol? 

 A bladder 

 B heart 

 C kidney 

 D liver 


© UCLES 2019 0610/13/O/N/19 

**27** The diagram shows reproduction in a potato plant. 

 tuber forming 

 new tuber 

 Which process is shown? 

 A asexual reproduction 

 B fertilisation 

 C pollination 

 D sexual reproduction 

**28** The diagram shows part of a flower. 

## 1 

## 2 

## 3 

## 4 

 Where does fertilisation occur and where are the ovules and pollen grains found? 

 fertilisation occurs here 

 ovules are found here 

 pollen grains are found here 

 A 1 2 4 

 B 2 3 4 

 C 3 3 1 

 D 4 1 2 


© UCLES 2019 0610/13/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**29** Which method of birth control can be used as a barrier to sperm **and** sexually transmitted diseases during sexual intercourse? 

 A condom 

 B IUD 

 C IUS 

 D surgical sterilisation 

**30** The diagram shows a plant cell. 

 Where are the chromosomes found? 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 

**31** Which statement describes human cells formed by meiosis? 

 A They are genetically identical gametes. 

 B They are genetically identical body cells. 

 C They are genetically different gametes. 

 D They are genetically different body cells. 

**32** Pea plants have two alleles for height. T is tall, t is short. 

 Two heterozygous pea plants, Tt, are crossed. 

 What is the phenotypic ratio of the offspring for this cross? 

 A all short plants 

 B all tall plants 

 C one tall plant to three short plants 

 D three tall plants to one short plant 


© UCLES 2019 0610/13/O/N/19 

**33** The graph shows the heights of humans. 

 frequency 

 height 

 Which statement is correct? 

 A The individuals of this population all have the same genotype. 

 B The individuals of this population all have the same phenotype. 

 C This population shows continuous variation. 

 D This population shows discontinuous variation. 

**34** What is a mutation? 

 A a condition caused by a dominant allele 

 B a genetic change 

 C a process used in genetic engineering 

 D an adaptive feature 

**35** Consumers take in carbon atoms from their food. 

 How do carbon atoms leave the consumers? 

 egestion excretion decomposition 

 A    key 

 B     = yes 

 C     = no 

 D    

**36** Which process is part of the water cycle? 

 A combustion 

 B fossilisation 

 C respiration 

 D transpiration 


© UCLES 2019 0610/13/O/N/19 **[Turn over** 

**37** A gene for insulin is taken from a human cell and placed in a bacterium. 

 The bacterium can then make human insulin. 

 What is this process called? 

 A adaptation 

 B genetic engineering 

 C natural selection 

 D selective breeding 

**38** Some examples of how areas of land may be used are listed: 

 1 food crop production 

 2 grazing cattle 

 3 house building 

 4 tree planting. 

 Which uses of land will cause habitat destruction? 

 A 1, 2 and 3 B 1, 2 and 4 C 2 and 3 only D 3 and 4 only 

**39** What are the possible effects of deforestation? 

 loss of soil flooding 

 decrease in atmospheric carbon dioxide 

 A yes yes no 

 B yes no yes 

 C no yes no 

 D no no yes 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2019 0610/13/O/N/19 

**40** The bloodworm is an organism that is found in heavily polluted water. 

 The diagram shows where raw sewage flows into a river. 

 Where would there be fewest bloodworms? 

 input of raw sewage 

## B 

## A 

## C D 

 direction of flow 


