 This syllabus is regulated for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 14 printed pages and 2 blank pages. 

 IB19 03_0610_12/3RP © UCLES 2019 [Turn over 

# *8560040174* 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## BIOLOGY 0610/12 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) February/March 2019 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2019 0610/12/F/M/19 

**1** A living organism, X, can make its own food, get rid of toxic materials and detect and respond to stimuli. 

 What other four processes must organism X carry out to stay alive? 

 A excretion, growth, movement, sensitivity 

 B excretion, growth, nutrition, respiration 

 C growth, movement, reproduction, respiration 

 D movement, reproduction, respiration, sensitivity 

**2** What is a correct way of naming a species using the binomial system? 

 A Homo sapiens 

 B Homo Sapiens 

 C human being 

 D sapiens 

**3** The diagram shows a pea pod, which is a fruit. 

 sepals seed 

 Use the key to identify the fruit. 

 1 sepals fall off as soon as the flower is fertilised ............................ go to 2 

 sepals do not fall off as soon as the flower is fertilised ................. go to 3 

 2 pod contains fewer than four seeds .............................................. A 

 pod contains more than four seeds ............................................... B 

 3 fruit splits to release several seeds ............................................... C 

 fruit splits to release only one seed ............................................... D 


© UCLES 2019 0610/12/F/M/19 **[Turn over** 

**4** The diagram shows two cells. 

 Which process can be carried out by only one of these cells? 

 A controlling the chemical reactions in the cell 

 B controlling the movement of substances into the cell 

 C making starch inside the cell 

 D using glucose inside the cell 

**5** The diagram shows a palisade mesophyll cell from a green leaf. 

## W 

## X 

## Y 

## Z 

 In which labelled part does photosynthesis occur and where are chromosomes found? 

 photosynthesis occurs 

 where chromosomes are found 

 A X W 

 B X Z 

 C Y X 

 D Y W 


© UCLES 2019 0610/12/F/M/19 

**6** The photograph shows a cross-section of a root. 

 xylem 

 root hair 

 The root hair and the xylem are part of the same 

 A cell and organism. 

 B cell and tissue. 

 C organ and organism. 

 D tissue and organ. 

**7** The diagram shows a fly. 

 X Y 

 The line XY represents the length of the wing. 

 The length of line XY is 26 mm. 

 The actual size of the wing between XY is 4 mm. 

 What is the magnification of the image? 

 A ×0.15 B ×6.5 C × 22 D × 104 


© UCLES 2019 0610/12/F/M/19 **[Turn over** 

**8** A frog is an animal. A frog’s skin is permeable to oxygen and carbon dioxide. 

 When a frog is swimming in pond water, in which directions will there be a net diffusion of oxygen and carbon dioxide? 

 from the frog into the water 

 from the water into the frog 

 A carbon dioxide oxygen 

 B carbon dioxide and oxygen no movement 

 C oxygen carbon dioxide 

 D no movement carbon dioxide and oxygen 

**9** Which process only involves the movement of water through the partially permeable membrane of a cell? 

 A absorption 

 B evaporation 

 C osmosis 

 D transpiration 

**10** The diagram shows the effect of an enzyme working in the human digestive system. 

 protein amino acids 

 enzyme at pH 1.5 

 and temperature 37 °C 

 What would reduce the rate of production of amino acids? 

 A removing the amino acids as they are formed 

 B increasing the amount of protein 

 C raising the temperature to 37.1 °C 

 D raising the pH to 7.5 


© UCLES 2019 0610/12/F/M/19 

**11** The diagram shows an experiment to investigate photosynthesis. 

 light 

 start 

 light 

 finish 

 gas 

 What is the most abundant gas present at the top of the tube at the end of the experiment? 

 A carbon dioxide 

 B methane 

 C sulfur dioxide 

 D oxygen 

**12** DCPIP can be used to test for vitamin C in food. Lemon juice contains vitamin C. 

 When lemon juice is tested what are the results? 

 A starts blue, finishes colourless 

 B starts colourless, finishes blue 

 C stays blue 

 D stays colourless 

**13** What is meant by chemical digestion? 

 A Large insoluble molecules are broken down into small soluble molecules. 

 B Large soluble molecules are broken down into small insoluble molecules. 

 C Small insoluble molecules are built up into large soluble molecules. 

 D Small soluble molecules are built up into large insoluble molecules. 


© UCLES 2019 0610/12/F/M/19 **[Turn over** 

**14** The diagram shows a cross-section through a plant stem. 

 tissue 1 

 tissue 2 

 What are the functions of the two labelled tissues? 

 tissue 1 tissue 2 

 A transport only support only 

 B transport only transport and support 

 C transport and support transport only 

 D support only transport only 

**15** A leafy shoot is placed in a solution of a red dye. 

 After 30 minutes, which part of a leaf from this shoot will contain the red dye? 

 A 

## B 

## C 

## D 


© UCLES 2019 0610/12/F/M/19 

**16** The diagrams show stages in the passage of water through a plant. 

 Which arrow shows water moving in the form of water vapour? 

## B 

## A 

## C 

## D 

**17** The diagram shows a section of the heart. 

## R 

## P 

## Q 

 What is the function of the structure labelled Q? 

 A It controls the amount of blood leaving the heart. 

 B It increases the pressure in part R. 

 C It prevents backflow of blood into part P. 

 D It prevents blood flowing into the vena cava. 


© UCLES 2019 0610/12/F/M/19 **[Turn over** 

**18** The body has different types of defences against pathogens. 

 1 antibodies 

 2 hairs in the nose 

 3 mucus 

 4 skin 

 Which defences help to prevent pathogens reaching the alveoli when breathing in? 

 A 1, 2, and 3 B 2, 3, and 4 C 2 and 3 only D 2 only 

**19** What are the approximate percentages of oxygen and carbon dioxide in inspired air? 

 percentage of oxygen 

 percentage of carbon dioxide 

 A 16 4.00 

 B 16 8.00 

 C 20 0.04 

 D 20 4.00 

**20** The flow diagram summarises three different ways that glucose can be broken down to release energy. 

 plus oxygen 

 glucose 

## 1 

 carbon dioxide and water 

 lactic acid 

 ethanol 

## 2 

## 3 

 Which routes involve the action of enzymes? 

 A 1 only B 1 and 2 only C 2 and 3 only D 1, 2 and 3 

**21** Which of these would increase the volume of urine produced by a human? 

 A being in a hot environment 

 B drinking large volumes of water 

 C suffering from diarrhoea 

 D running a long distance 


© UCLES 2019 0610/12/F/M/19 

**22** Which structure controls the amount of light entering the eye? 

 A cornea 

 B iris 

 C lens 

 D retina 

**23** Which hormone is secreted by the pancreas? 

 A adrenaline 

 B insulin 

 C oestrogen 

 D testosterone 

**24** In which organ is alcohol broken down? 

 A brain 

 B kidney 

 C liver 

 D stomach 

**25** Antibiotics can be used to treat some infections. 

 Antibiotics can treat infections caused by 

 A all pathogens. 

 B bacteria and viruses only. 

 C bacteria only. 

 D viruses only. 


© UCLES 2019 0610/12/F/M/19 **[Turn over** 

**26** The diagram shows a strawberry plant. 

 Which labelled part of the plant can only be produced by asexual reproduction? 

 A 

## B 

## C 

## D 

**27** What must always be available to allow seeds to germinate? 

 A carbon dioxide 

 B light 

 C mineral salts 

 D water 

**28** What is a possible order of events during labour and birth? 

 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 

 A cervix dilates 

 baby passes through vagina 

 amniotic sac breaks 

 uterus muscles begin to contract 

 B baby passes through vagina 

 cervix dilates 

 amniotic sac breaks 

 uterus muscles begin to contract 

 C uterus muscles begin to contract 

 cervix dilates 

 amniotic sac breaks 

 baby passes through vagina 

 D uterus muscles begin to contract 

 baby passes through vagina 

 cervix dilates 

 amniotic sac breaks 


© UCLES 2019 0610/12/F/M/19 

**29** The diagram shows a woman’s body temperature during a menstrual cycle. 

 Monitoring body temperature is one natural method of birth control. 

 During which part of the menstrual cycle should sexual intercourse be avoided to try to prevent pregnancy? 

 body temperature 

## 1 14 

 days 

## 7 21 28 

## A B C D 

**30** What is the name of a length of DNA that codes for a protein? 

 A amino acid 

 B chromosome 

 C gene 

 D nucleus 

**31** Which cells in the human body are produced by the process of meiosis? 

 A blood cells 

 B muscle cells 

 C skin cells 

 D sperm cells 

**32** Which human characteristic is an example of discontinuous variation? 

 A height 

 B skin colour 

 C tongue rolling 

 D weight 


© UCLES 2019 0610/12/F/M/19 **[Turn over** 

**33** An adaptive feature of an organism is defined as one that helps the organism to 

 A change. 

 B disperse to new habitats. 

 C grow. 

 D survive and reproduce. 

**34** What is the principal source of energy input to biological systems? 

 A carbon dioxide in air 

 B glucose 

 C minerals in soil 

 D sunlight 

**35** Which process involves water falling from clouds towards the ground? 

 A evaporation 

 B cloud formation 

 C precipitation 

 D transpiration 

**36** Which enzyme in a biological washing powder will help remove fatty stains? 

 A amylase 

 B lipase 

 C pectinase 

 D protease 

**37** Corn is a crop plant. Glow-worms are organisms which give off light. 

 Which process could use these two species to make corn plants which glow? 

 A breeding the organisms together 

 B causing mutations in the organisms 

 C selective breeding 

 D transferring genes from one species to another species 


© UCLES 2019 0610/12/F/M/19 

**38** What is used to reduce competition from weeds when growing crops? 

 A deforestation 

 B fertiliser 

 C herbicide 

 D insecticide 

**39** The food web shows the feeding relationships in a woodland. 

 trees 

 wood pigeon 

 caterpillars 

 chaffinch 

 sparrowhawk 

 grey squirrels 

 If all the chaffinches in the food web die, which effect would this have? 

 A The amount of damage to trees will increase. 

 B The food supply for grey squirrels will increase. 

 C The number of wood pigeons will increase. 

 D The population of caterpillars will decrease. 

**40** What is an example of a non-renewable resource? 

 A biofuels 

 B fish 

 C fossil fuels 

 D trees 


© UCLES 2019 0610/12/F/M/19 

## BLANK PAGE 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2019 0610/12/F/M/19 

## BLANK PAGE 


