 This syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 16 printed pages. 

 IB18 03_0610_22/4RP © UCLES 2018 [Turn over 

# *3265335475* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## BIOLOGY 0610/22 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) February/March 2018 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2018 0610/22/F/M/18 

**1** Biology is the study of living things. 

 Which characteristic applies to all forms of life? 

 A able to move from place to place 

 B able to reproduce 

 C carry out photosynthesis 

 D possess a nervous system 

**2** Two animals have an identical sequence of amino acids in one of the proteins found in their cells. 

 What does this indicate about these animals? 

 A They have been eating the same types of food. 

 B They have not been exposed to substances that cause mutation. 

 C They must be members of the same genus. 

 D They share a recent ancestor. 

**3** The diagram shows part of a flowering plant. 

 Using the key, identify this plant. 

 1 three petals ................................................. go to 2 

 more than three petals ............................... go to 3 

 2 leaves longer than they are wide ................ A 

 leaves wider than they are long .................. B 

 3 leaves parallel-veined ................................. C 

 leaves not parallel-veined ........................... D 


© UCLES 2018 0610/22/F/M/18 **[Turn over** 

**4** The diagram shows a single cell from an organism called _Spirogyra_. 

 vacuole 

 cytoplasm chloroplast cell wall 

 cytoplasmic nucleus strand 

 Which features does Spirogyra share with plant cells? 

 cell wall chloroplast cytoplasm nucleus vacuole 

 A      

 B      

 C      

 D      

**5** A student was told that a drawing of a bacterial cell had been magnified 30 000 times. The length of the drawing was 45 mm. 

 What was the actual length of the bacterium? 

 A 0.15 mm B 1.5 μm C 0.66 mm D 0.66 μm 


© UCLES 2018 0610/22/F/M/18 

**6** Which graph represents the effect of increasing temperature on the rate of diffusion? 

 rate of diffusion 

 temperature 

## A 

## 0 

## 0 

 rate of diffusion 

 temperature 

## B 

## 0 

## 0 

 rate of diffusion 

 temperature 

## C 

## 0 

## 0 

 rate of diffusion 

 temperature 

## D 

## 0 

## 0 

**7** Protoplasts are plant cells that have had their cell walls removed. 

 What happens if plant protoplasts are placed in distilled water? 

 A They get larger and become turgid. 

 B They get larger and burst. 

 C They get smaller and become plasmolysed. 

 D They get smaller and shrivel up. 

**8** When a food substance is tested with iodine solution, which colour shows the presence of starch? 

 A blue-black 

 B brown 

 C orange 

 D purple 


© UCLES 2018 0610/22/F/M/18 **[Turn over** 

**9** The graph shows the activity of three digestive enzymes at differing pH levels. 

 enzyme activity 

## 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 

 pH 

## X Y Z 

 Which statement is correct? 

 A Enzymes X and Y are both active at pH 7. 

 B Enzymes X and Z are both active at pH 4. 

 C Enzymes Y and Z are both active at pH 4. 

 D Enzymes Y and Z are both active at pH 8. 

**10** The diagram shows a cross-section of part of a leaf. 

 upper epidermis 

 lower epidermis 

 midrib 

 layer X 

 Which type of cell is found in layer X? 

 A B C D 


© UCLES 2018 0610/22/F/M/18 

**11** Which molecule contains magnesium? 

 A chlorophyll 

 B fat 

 C glucose 

 D starch 

**12** In which part of the body of a mammal does mechanical digestion occur? 

 A gall bladder 

 B liver 

 C mouth 

 D pancreas 

**13** During growth, potato plants produce flowers and underground storage organs called tubers. 

 During this time, which parts of the plant act as sources and sinks for translocation? 

 flowers leaves potato tubers 

 A sink sink source 

 B sink source sink 

 C source sink source 

 D source source sink 

**14** What is an advantage of a double circulatory system in mammals? 

 A Blood can flow down the body on the left and up the body on the right. 

 B Blood can flow more slowly along the circulatory system. 

 C Blood pressure stays the same throughout the circulatory system. 

 D Oxygenated and deoxygenated blood are kept separate. 

**15** The body has defences to protect itself from diseases. 

 What is a mechanical barrier to diseases? 

 A hairs in the nose 

 B plasma 

 C stomach acid 

 D white blood cells 


© UCLES 2018 0610/22/F/M/18 **[Turn over** 

**16** During exercise, receptors detect a change in the blood and cause the breathing rate to increase. 

 What change do the receptors detect and where are they found in the body? 

 change in blood site of detection 

 A carbon dioxide increases brain 

 B carbon dioxide increases intercostal muscles 

 C oxygen decreases brain 

 D oxygen decreases intercostal muscles 

**17** An experiment is set up to investigate the uptake of oxygen by germinating seeds. 

## X Y 

 soda lime absorbs carbon dioxide 

 dead seeds rinsed germinating in antiseptic seeds 

 water bath at 25 °C 

 coloured water 

 coloured water 

 What happens to the levels of the coloured water at X and Y? 

## X Y 

 A falls rises 

 B falls unchanged 

 C rises falls 

 D rises unchanged 


© UCLES 2018 0610/22/F/M/18 

**18** The diagram shows a section of a kidney. 

## X 

## Y 

## Z 

 What are the correct labels? 

## X Y Z 

 A cortex medulla ureter 

 B cortex ureter medulla 

 C medulla cortex ureter 

 D medulla ureter cortex 

**19** A boy accidentally touches a very hot object and immediately takes his hand away. 

 In this reflex action, what is the effector? 

 A a heat receptor in his hand 

 B a motor neurone 

 C a muscle in his arm 

 D the spinal cord 

**20** Which description of how the pupil of the eye gets smaller is correct? 

 circular muscles radial muscles 

 A contract contract 

 B contract relax 

 C relax contract 

 D relax relax 


© UCLES 2018 0610/22/F/M/18 **[Turn over** 

**21** There are two types of diabetes, type 1 and type 2. 

 The graph shows the number of children with each type of diabetes per 100 000 children, in one country. 

## 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 

 age / years 

## 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 

## 350 

## 300 

## 250 

## 200 

## 150 

## 100 

## 50 

## 0 

 number of children with diabetes per 100 000 children 

 type 1 type 2 

 Which conclusion can be made from the graph? 

 A 1.5% of 9-year-olds have diabetes. 

 B 31.3% of 17-year-olds with diabetes have type 2 diabetes. 

 C There are 10 more 12-year-olds in the country with diabetes than 13-year-olds. 

 D Type 2 diabetes will cause more health problems than type 1. 


© UCLES 2018 0610/22/F/M/18 

**22** The diagram shows an experiment using wheat shoot tips to investigate plant growth. 

## X Y X Y 

 shoot tip removed 

 after two days in even light 

 Which statement is supported by the evidence provided by this experiment? 

 A Auxin moves through the plant by osmosis. 

 B Auxin is made in the shoot tip. 

 C Auxin is unequally distributed in response to light. 

 D Auxin inhibits cell elongation. 

**23** A wind-pollinated plant has which features? 

 A large anthers, coloured petals and produces nectar 

 B large petals, small anthers and a sticky stigma 

 C small petals, large anthers and a feathery stigma 

 D small petals, produces nectar and has a strong scent 

**24** Which describes a human male gamete? 

 motile 

 relative size compared to female gamete 

 flagellum present 

 A yes larger yes 

 B yes smaller yes 

 C no smaller no 

 D no larger no 


© UCLES 2018 0610/22/F/M/18 **[Turn over** 

**25** What is a consequence of HIV infection on the human body? 

 A decreased lymphocyte numbers 

 B increased protection against bacterial infections 

 C increased haemoglobin production 

 D sickle-cell anaemia 

**26** Which sex chromosomes in the egg and the sperm will produce a male child? 

 sex chromosome in egg 

 sex chromosome in sperm 

 A X X 

 B X Y 

 C Y X 

 D Y Y 

**27** Cell division has the following functions. 

 1 asexual reproduction 

 2 growth 

 3 production of gametes 

 4 repair of damaged tissue 

 5 replacement of cells 

 Which functions are specific to mitosis? 

 A 1, 2, 3 and 4 

 B 1, 2, 4 and 5 

 C 2, 3 and 4 only 

 D 3, 4 and 5 only 


© UCLES 2018 0610/22/F/M/18 

**28** The chart shows the inheritance of fur colour in a small mammal. 

 If the allele for white fur is dominant, which animal must be heterozygous for the gene controlling fur colour? 

## × 

## × 

## A B 

## C 

## D 

**29** In areas of the world where malaria is present, the sickle-cell allele is more common. 

 What is the reason for this? 

 A Both diseases are caused by the same allele. 

 B Heterozygous individuals with the sickle-cell allele are less likely to have malaria. 

 C Heterozygous individuals with the sickle-cell allele are more likely to have malaria. 

 D These are parts of the world with many diseases. 

**30** Which feature helps a xerophyte survive in its environment? 

 A flat leaves with a large surface area 

 B no cuticle 

 C short roots 

 D sunken stomata 


© UCLES 2018 0610/22/F/M/18 **[Turn over** 

**31** What is a feature of natural selection? 

 A It does not require a struggle for survival. 

 B It does not require variation in a population. 

 C It involves the selection of advantageous phenotypes. 

 D It involves the selection of disadvantageous genotypes. 

**32** The diagram shows energy flow through an ecosystem. 

 Sun herbivore 

 decomposer 

 carnivore 

 green plant 

## X 

 In what form is energy transferred at X? 

 A chemical 

 B heat 

 C kinetic 

 D light 

**33** The diagram shows part of the carbon cycle. 

 Which process reduces the carbon dioxide content of the atmosphere? 

 carbon dioxide in atmosphere 

 industry and power 

 transport animals plants 

 fossil fuels (coal and oil) decomposers 

## B 

## C 

## D 

## A 


© UCLES 2018 0610/22/F/M/18 

**34** The graph shows the human population of the world for the last 2000 years. 

## 0 1000 

 time / years 

## 2000 

## 6000 

## 4000 

## 2000 

## 0 

 population / million 

 P 

 What is the phase identified by P? 

 A death 

 B exponential (log) 

 C lag 

 D stationary 

**35** Some of the characteristics of bacteria are listed. 

 1 can make complex molecules 

 2 can reproduce quickly 

 3 have cytoplasm 

 4 may cause diseases 

 Which characteristics make bacteria useful in biotechnology and genetic engineering? 

 A 1, 2, 3 and 4 B 1 and 2 only C 2 and 3 only D 3 and 4 only 

**36** What is a requirement for the production of penicillin in a fermenter? 

 A adding bubbles of nitrogen gas to mix the nutrients and Penicillium 

 B adding the required amount of sugar as a nutrient 

 C ensuring no oxygen enters the fermenter so only anaerobic respiration occurs 

 D maintaining a constant temperature of 95 °C to prevent other microorganisms growing 


© UCLES 2018 0610/22/F/M/18 **[Turn over** 

**37** Human insulin can be produced in large quantities by modified _E. coli_ bacteria. 

 Four of the steps in this production process are listed. 

 1 Insulin is removed from the bacterial culture. 

 2 An enzyme is used to cut out the insulin gene from a human chromosome. 

 3 The insulin gene is placed into the plasmid of the bacterium. 

 4 Bacteria with the insulin gene reproduce very rapidly. 

 What is the order of these steps? 

 A 1 → 2 → 3 → 4 

 B 1 → 3 → 4 → 2 

 C 2 → 3 → 4 → 1 

 D 4 → 1 → 2 → 3 

**38** What is a major contributor to the problem of worldwide famine? 

 A equal distribution of food 

 B increasing population and life expectancy 

 C large-scale monoculture of crop plants 

 D use of herbicides and insecticides in farming 

**39** The flow diagram shows a process that can occur as a result of pollution in a river. 

 high concentrations of nitrate ions enter a river 

 algae reproduce rapidly 

 algae die and decompose 

 low concentration of dissolved oxygen kills organisms 

 Which term describes the process shown in the flow diagram? 

 A aerobic respiration 

 B eutrophication 

 C nitrogen cycle 

 D photosynthesis 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2018 0610/22/F/M/18 

**40** Which stage in the treatment of sewage removes large floating objects, such as plastic bags? 

 A aeration 

 B discharge 

 C screening 

 D sedimentation 


