 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 15 printed pages and 1 blank page. 

 IB17 11_0610_21/4RP © UCLES 2017 [Turn over 

# *6977353268 

# * 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## BIOLOGY 0610/21 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) October/November 2017 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2017 0610/21/O/N/17 

**1** Which term is defined as all the chemical reactions that occur in cells? 

 A photosynthesis 

 B protein synthesis 

 C respiration 

 D metabolism 

**2** The diagram shows a section of DNA from a chimpanzee. 

## A G C T A C A G A G 

 Which diagram shows a section of DNA from the organism that is most closely related to the chimpanzee? 

## A A G C T A C A G A T 

## B A G C T A C A G T T 

## C A T C A A C A G T T 

## D A T C T A C A G T T 

**3** The length of a mitochondrion in a photomicrograph is 15 mm. 

 The actual length of the mitochondrion is 3 μm. 

 What is the magnification of the photomicrograph? 

 A × 5 B × 45 C × 5000 D × 45 000 


© UCLES 2017 0610/21/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**4** The diagrams show a leaf and its internal structure. 

## 1 

## 2 

## 3 

 What are the levels of organisation of the labelled structures? 

## 1 2 3 

 A cell tissue organ system 

 B organ cell tissue 

 C organ system tissue cell 

 D tissue cell organ 

**5** Different factors affect the rate of diffusion of molecules across a membrane. 

 Which row represents changes to factors that will increase the rate of diffusion? 

 concentration gradient across a membrane 

 thickness of membrane 

 surface area of membrane 

 temperature 

 A decrease decrease increase increase 

 B decrease increase increase decrease 

 C increase decrease increase increase 

 D increase increase decrease decrease 


© UCLES 2017 0610/21/O/N/17 

**6** A red blood cell and a palisade mesophyll cell are placed in a solution which has a higher water potential than the cells. 

 What will happen to each cell? 

red blood cell (^) mesophyll cellpalisade **A** bursts bursts **B** bursts gains mass **C** loses mass gains mass **D** loses mass loses mass **7** The diagram shows a protease molecule catalysing the break down of a protein molecule. 

## R 

## P 

## Q 

## S 

 What are the parts labelled P, Q, R and S? 

 enzyme product substrate active site 

 A P Q R S 

 B R S P Q 

 C S P Q R 

 D S R Q P 


© UCLES 2017 0610/21/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**8** The diagram shows the structure of part of a DNA molecule. 

## X 

 What does X represent? 

 A amino acid 

 B base 

 C carbon 

 D protein 

**9** Which statement about enzymes is correct? 

 A Enzymes become part of the product. 

 B Lowering the pH always slows down the reaction rate. 

 C Raising the temperature always increases the reaction rate. 

 D The specificity of an enzyme depends on the shape of its active site. 

**10** Which enzyme is used to produce clear apple juice? 

 A amylase 

 B lipase 

 C pectinase 

 D protease 

**11** Which structure would be found in large numbers in cells that have a high energy requirement? 

 A chloroplast 

 B endoplasmic reticulum 

 C large vacuole 

 D mitochondrion 


© UCLES 2017 0610/21/O/N/17 

**12** What must be increased in the diet of a person suffering from constipation? 

 A fats 

 B fibre 

 C iron 

 D protein 

**13** Which disease can be caused by a deficiency of iron in the diet? 

 A anaemia 

 B kwashiorkor 

 C marasmus 

 D rickets 

**14** The diagram shows the human alimentary canal, with a string marked in metres beside it. 

 oesophagus 

 anus 

## 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 

 string marked in metres 

 How long is the small intestine? 

 A 2 m B 6 m C 8 m D 9 m 


© UCLES 2017 0610/21/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**15** The graph shows the concentration of oxygen in the air spaces of a green leaf of a plant during a 12-hour period. 

 concentration of oxygen in air spaces 

 time 

## X 

 Which statement about carbon dioxide in the air spaces during time X is correct? 

 A Carbon dioxide is being produced because the rate of photosynthesis is greater than the rate of respiration. 

 B Carbon dioxide is being produced because the rate of respiration is greater than the rate of photosynthesis. 

 C Carbon dioxide is being used because the rate of photosynthesis is greater than the rate of respiration. 

 D Carbon dioxide is being used because the rate of respiration is greater than the rate of photosynthesis. 

**16** What is a description of transpiration? 

 A exchange of gases between the leaf and the atmosphere 

 B loss of water vapour from the leaves and stems of a plant 

 C movement of water from the roots to the leaves 

 D movement of water through the cells of the leaf 


© UCLES 2017 0610/21/O/N/17 

**17** The diagram shows the vessels associated with the flow of fluids to and from body cells. 

 Which is the lymph vessel? 

## A 

## D 

## C 

## B 

**18** The diagram shows a cross-section through a human blood vessel. 

 elastic and fibrous connective tissue 

 muscle layer 

 Which type of blood vessel does the diagram show? 

 A an artery 

 B a capillary 

 C a vein 

 D a ventricle 

**19** Which are both chemical barriers to the transmission of pathogens? 

 A mucus and stomach acid 

 B mucus and white blood cells 

 C skin and hairs in the nose 

 D skin and stomach acid 


© UCLES 2017 0610/21/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**20** The table shows some of the changes that occur during breathing. 

 from contracted to relaxed 

 from relaxed to contracted 

 diaphragm P X 

 external intercostals Q Y 

 internal intercostals R Z 

 Which changes occur to cause inspiration? 

 A P, Q and Z B X, Q and R C X, Y and R D X, Y and Z 

**21** In an experiment to investigate anaerobic respiration, two bottles are set up in a warm room, as shown. 

 balloon 

## P Q 

 balloon 

 yeast and water 

 sugar, yeast and water 

 What would happen to each balloon after one day? 

## P Q 

## A 

## P Q 

## B 

## P Q 

## C 

## P Q 

## D 


© UCLES 2017 0610/21/O/N/17 

**22** The graph shows the lactic acid concentration in blood during and after exercise. 

 1.0 

## 0.5 

## 0 

## 0 5 10 15 

 time / minutes 

## 20 25 30 

 blood lactic acid concentration / mg dm–3 

 exercise recovery 

## Z 

 The continuation of which process accounts for the shape of the graph at Z? 

 A deep breathing 

 B high heart rate 

 C high rate of breathing 

 D movement of lactic acid from the muscles 

**23** What is the most important function of sweating? 

 A to remove excess heat from the body 

 B to remove excess salts from the body 

 C to remove excess urea from the body 

 D to remove excess water from the body 

**24** Four effects of a specific hormone are listed. 

 ● increased blood pressure 

 ● increased blood glucose concentration 

 ● increased rate of respiration 

 ● reduced blood flow to the gut 

 What is this hormone? 

 A adrenaline 

 B glucagon 

 C insulin 

 D testosterone 


© UCLES 2017 0610/21/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**25** The diagram shows a person sweating in hot weather. 

 What part is played by sweat glands during the process of sweating? 

 A effector 

 B receptor 

 C sense organ 

 D stimulus 

**26** The diagram shows a synapse in a reflex arc. 

 P Q 

 What are the identities of the two neurones and in which direction does the neurotransmitter pass? 

 neurone P neurone Q direction of passageof neurotransmitter 

 A motor relay P → Q 

 B motor sensory P → Q 

 C relay motor Q → P 

 D relay sensory Q → P 


© UCLES 2017 0610/21/O/N/17 

**27** The immune system recognises pathogens and attacks them. 

 Which feature of pathogens triggers this response? 

 A antibodies 

 B antibiotics 

 C antigens 

 D memory cells 

**28** Which environmental factor is **not** always a requirement for seed germination? 

 A light 

 B oxygen 

 C suitable temperature 

 D water 

**29** Which row shows the adaptive features of sperm cells? 

 flagellum jelly coat mitochondria 

 A absent absent present 

 B absent present absent 

 C present absent present 

 D present present absent 

**30** In some mammals the allele for brown coat colour is dominant to the allele for white coat colour. 

 Which percentage of offspring will be white if a cross is made between two heterozygous mammals? 

 A 0% B 25% C 50% D 100% 

**31** Which term is defined as a length of DNA that codes for a protein? 

 A amino acid 

 B chromosome 

 C gene 

 D mutation 


© UCLES 2017 0610/21/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**32** The following are involved in protein synthesis. 

 1 amino acids assembled in order 

 2 mRNA moves to the cytoplasm 

 3 mRNA passing through a ribosome 

 4 DNA in the nucleus 

 In which order do they become involved when proteins are made? 

 A 1 → 3 → 2 → 4 

 B 3 → 2 → 1 → 4 

 C 4 → 2 → 3 → 1 

 D 4 → 3 → 2 → 1 

**33** What makes tongue rolling an example of discontinuous variation? 

 A A person can roll their tongue only when they are young. 

 B There are many different types of tongue rollers. 

 C Tongue rolling has to be learnt. 

 D Tongue rolling is something that a person either can or cannot do. 

**34** The distribution of the sickle-cell allele in human populations varies in different areas of the world. 

 What is an explanation for this difference? 

 A People that are heterozygous for the sickle-cell allele have a resistance to cholera. 

 B People that are heterozygous for the sickle-cell allele have a resistance to malaria. 

 C People that are heterozygous for the sickle-cell allele are more likely to suffer from anaemia. 

 D People with sickle-cell anaemia have more alleles. 

**35** Nitrogen in the air cannot be used by plants until it is in the form of nitrates. 

 Which two processes convert nitrogen from the air into nitrates? 

 A decomposition of faeces and nitrification 

 B denitrification and lightning 

 C nitrogen fixation by bacteria and denitrification 

 D nitrogen fixation by bacteria and lightning 


© UCLES 2017 0610/21/O/N/17 

**36** What is shown by the widest block in a pyramid of numbers for a grassland ecosystem? 

 A all the consumers in the pyramid 

 B the carnivores in the pyramid 

 C the organisms at the top of the pyramid 

 D the producers in the pyramid 

**37** The diagrams show the depth and rate of breathing in a person at 12.00 pm and 1.00 pm. 

 volume 

## 0 10 20 30 

 time / seconds 

## 40 50 60 70 

 volume 

## 0 10 20 30 

 time / seconds 

 12.00 pm 1.00 pm 

## 40 50 60 70 

 0.5 dm^3 

 What happens to the person’s breathing between 12.00 pm and 1.00 pm? 

 depth of breathing 

 rate of breathing 

 A decreases decreases 

 B decreases increases 

 C increases decreases 

 D increases increases 

**38** Ligase enzymes are used in genetic engineering to 

 A cut open plasmid DNA. 

 B insert plasmids into bacteria. 

 C isolate the DNA making up a human gene. 

 D join human DNA to plasmid DNA. 


© UCLES 2017 0610/21/O/N/17 

**39** What is **not** a reason for conservation programmes? 

 A to introduce new species 

 B to maintain nutrient cycles 

 C to maintain resources 

 D to protect vulnerable environments 

**40** Some examples of the waste products of human activity are discarded household rubbish, excess fertiliser, industrial chemicals and untreated sewage. 

 Which of these can both cause increased growth of aquatic plants? 

 A chemical waste and discarded household rubbish 

 B discarded household rubbish and excess fertiliser 

 C excess fertiliser and untreated sewage 

 D untreated sewage and chemical waste 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2017 0610/21/O/N/17 

## BLANK PAGE 


