 This document consists of 10 printed pages and 2 blank pages. 

 IB17 11_0455_13/5RP © UCLES 2017 [Turn over 

# *4006185780 

# * 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## ECONOMICS 0455/13 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice October/November 2017 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are thirty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. 


© UCLES 2017 0455/13/O/N/17 

**1** What does an economist mean by the factor of production called _capital_? 

 A goods that can be used to produce other goods B money used to start a business C resources that cannot be replaced D the profits of a company 

**2** A government decides to spend more on defence and cannot spend money on a new airport. 

 Which concepts can be applied to the above statement? 

 A budget surplus; external cost B factor of production; private monopoly C public sector; opportunity cost D trade surplus; budget deficit 

**3** The diagram shows a production possibility curve diagram. A country’s initial position is X. 

 services 

O (^) manufacturing 

## R 

## T 

## S 

## X 

 Better manufacturing processes are introduced and the country improves its tourist facilities. 

 What would represent this? 

 A S to T B T to R C X to R D X to T 

**4** What might be an external cost of drinking alcohol? 

 A the cost of a bottle of wine B the risk of illness from drinking alcohol C the risk of street violence D the tax paid to the government 


© UCLES 2017 0455/13/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**5** What is a benefit of the market system? 

 A Competition ensures choice for consumers. B Prices equal supply costs. C Unemployment is kept to a minimum. D Wage differentials are small. 

**6** The table illustrates the demand and supply for coffee in a market in Africa. 

 price per kg ($) 

 quantity demanded (kg) 

 quantity supplied (kg) 

 10 50 10 20 40 20 30 30 30 40 20 40 50 10 50 

 When the price rises from $20 to $30 per kg, what is the price elasticity of demand for coffee? 

 A 0.2 B 0.5 C 2.0 D 5.0 

**7** In recent years the price of crude oil on the world market has fallen dramatically. One cause has been the increase in oil obtained by the new extraction process of fracking. 

 How is this shown on a demand and supply diagram of the market for crude oil? 

 A a shift in the demand curve to the left B a shift in the demand curve to the right C a shift in the supply curve to the left D a shift in the supply curve to the right 

**8** What is the best example of specialisation? 

 A a diversified engineering company B a general repairs handyman C a self-sufficient, non-trading country D an old person’s helper and care assistant 


© UCLES 2017 0455/13/O/N/17 

**9** Which workers are most likely to gain the highest increase in wages from a pay rise of 2%? 

 A airline pilots B farm workers C nurses D shop assistants 

**10** A female accountant in a private firm earns $80 per hour; a male Professor of Finance in a government university earns $40 per hour. Each works the same number of hours. 

 What could explain the difference in earnings? 

 A It is difficult to measure the output per hour in each profession. B Pay in the private sector is profit-related but is not in the public sector. C Qualifications of accountants are lower than those of Professors of Finance. D Women are generally given preference over men in professional jobs. 

**11** Each of the four sets of descriptions in the table refers to a person applying for a job. 

 Which person is likely to receive higher pay? 

 A skilled experienced younger worker B skilled inexperienced older worker C unskilled experienced older worker D unskilled inexperienced younger worker 

**12** Which is an internal diseconomy of scale? 

 A a lack of communication in a firm B a reduction of cost by buying in bulk C a shortage of skilled labour in an area D traffic congestion in a particular area 


© UCLES 2017 0455/13/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**13** Private multinational clothing companies operate in developing countries to reduce their average costs of production. 

 Which feature of developing countries attracts them for this purpose? 

 A In developing countries, clothing workers receive low wages. B In developing countries, foreign managers are allowed to pay no income tax. C In developing countries, multinationals are allowed to take profits out of the country. D In developing countries, there is a large market for fashion clothing. 

**14** A major computer company announced that its profits had fallen below the level predicted. 

 What might have caused this? 

 A increased advertising costs that greatly improved sales B low prices that made the company’s product competitive C new technology that reduced costs D reduced sales and low prices 

**15** An entrepreneur buys a workshop for $10 000 to make picture frames. In the first year he spent $40 000 on materials and employed two workers. He paid the workers for each frame produced with a total cost of $30 000. He bought a vehicle to deliver the frames for $10 000. 

 What were his total variable costs? 

 A $40 000 B $70 000 C $80 000 D $100 000 

**16** What, when increased, will help a government to reduce the rate of inflation? 

 A budget deficit B consumer spending C income tax D pensions 

**17** Which policy is most likely to increase the level of economic activity? 

 A increasing the exchange rate B increasing the rate of interest C reducing government spending D reducing the general tax level 


© UCLES 2017 0455/13/O/N/17 

**18** The graph shows the percentage of income paid in taxation. 

 Which line represents a proportional tax? 

 % income paid in taxation 

O (^) income **A** (^) **B** 

## C 

## D 

**19** A government collects the following revenue in a year. 

 $m customs duties 100 taxes on goods 200 taxes on income 400 taxes on services 300 

 What is the amount of indirect tax revenue? 

 A $200 m B $400 m C $500 m D $600 m 

**20** Why is the Human Development Index (HDI) often considered to be better than Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per head as a measure of living standards? 

 A GDP per head excludes economic growth. B GDP per head ignores population growth. C HDI includes more than the production of goods and services. D HDI is calculated by the national government. 

**21** What may cause an immediate increase in the working population? 

 A a higher birth rate B a higher death rate C a higher fertility rate D a higher rate of net immigration 


© UCLES 2017 0455/13/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**22** The diagrams show percentage employment in different sectors in two countries. 

 primary secondary 

 country X 

 services 

## 70 

## 60 

## 50 

## 40 

## 30 

## 20 

## 10 

## 0 

 percentage employed 

 primary secondary 

 country Y 

 services 

## 70 

## 60 

## 50 

## 40 

## 30 

## 20 

## 10 

## 0 

 percentage employed 

 Which statement is correct when comparing country X and country Y? 

 A Country X employs more workers in secondary industry than country Y. B Country X produces more primary output than country Y. C Country Y is more developed than country X. D Country Y produces more secondary output than country X. 

**23** What is likely to fall when the rate of unemployment falls? 

 A business confidence B consumer spending C government revenue D government welfare payments 

**24** The birth rate and death rate in a country are the same. 

 What is likely to happen if there is a decrease in the birth rate, while the death rate and migration remain the same? 

 A population structure will remain the same B population will decrease C the standard of living will decrease D the working population will increase 


© UCLES 2017 0455/13/O/N/17 

**25** The charts show the population structure of a country in 1960 and 2015. 

## 3 2 1 0 0 1 2 3 

 male age female 85+ 80 – 84 

 millions 

## 75 – 79 

## 70 – 74 

## 65 – 69 

## 60 – 64 

## 55 – 59 

## 50 – 54 

## 45 – 49 

## 40 – 44 

## 35 – 39 

## 30 – 34 

## 25 – 29 

## 20 – 24 

## 15 – 19 

## 10 – 14 

## 5 – 9 

## 0 – 4 

## 3 2 1 0 0 1 2 3 

 male age female 

## 1960 2015 

## 85+ 

## 80 – 84 

 millions 

## 75 – 79 

## 70 – 74 

## 65 – 69 

## 60 – 64 

## 55 – 59 

## 50 – 54 

## 45 – 49 

## 40 – 44 

## 35 – 39 

## 30 – 34 

## 25 – 29 

## 20 – 24 

## 15 – 19 

## 10 – 14 

## 5 – 9 

## 0 – 4 

 What decreased between 1960 and 2015? 

 A average age B number of people below 15 C number of people over 60 D total population 


© UCLES 2017 0455/13/O/N/17 **[Turn over** 

**26** The table shows the Consumer Prices Index (CPI) for selected cities for August 2015 relative to New York, USA at 100. 

 city CPI 

 Geneva, Switzerland 137 Oslo, Norway 105 Sydney, Australia 89 Singapore 88 Istanbul, Turkey 48 Johannesburg, South Africa 48 Lima, Peru 44 

 What can be concluded from the table? 

 A Geneva had the highest average price level. B Living standards were highest in Lima. C Singapore was more expensive than Oslo. D The annual rate of inflation was the same in Istanbul and Johannesburg. 

**27** What is a benefit of tariffs? 

 A increased choice B increased government revenue C more competition D more trade 

**28** What is an increase in the value of an exchange rate of a currency in a floating system called? 

 A appreciation B depreciation C devaluation D revaluation 


© UCLES 2017 0455/13/O/N/17 

**29** A developing economy has a surplus on its trade in goods of $75 billion and a deficit on its trade in services of $25 billion, while its current account is in overall balance. 

 Which values for net income (primary income) and net transfers (secondary income) result in the current account being in balance? 

 net income net transfers 

 A deficit of $20 billion surplus of $120 billion B deficit of $30 billion deficit of $70 billion C surplus of $35 billion surplus of $15 billion D surplus of $40 billion deficit of $90 billion 

**30** What policy would encourage greater international specialisation? 

 A the promotion of industrial diversification B the protection of new businesses C the reduction of tariffs D the subsidising of service industries 


## BLANK PAGE 

© UCLES 2017 0455/13/O/N/17 


## BLANK PAGE 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2017 0455/13/O/N/17 


