 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 17 printed pages and 3 blank pages. 

 IB16 06_0625_23/3RP © UCLES 2016 [Turn over 

## *5153628261* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

### PHYSICS 0625/23 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) May/June 2016 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A, B, C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. Take the weight of 1.0 kg to be 10 N (acceleration of free fall = 10 m / s^2 ). 


© UCLES 2016 0625/23/M/J/16 

1 The diagram shows an enlarged drawing of the end of a metre rule. It is being used to measure the length of a small feather. 

# 1 

# mm 

cm (^2 3) 

# 1 0 2 0 3 0 

 What is the length of the feather? 

 A 19 mm B 29 mm C 19 cm D 29 cm 

2 An object moves at a constant speed for some time, then begins to accelerate. 

 Which distance-time graph shows this motion? 

 distance 

 time 

### 0 

### 0 

### A 

 distance 

 time 

### 0 

### 0 

### B 

 distance 

 time 

### 0 

### 0 

### C 

 distance 

 time 

### 0 

### 0 

### D 


© UCLES 2016 0625/23/M/J/16 [Turn over 

3 A heavy object is released near the surface of the Earth and falls freely. Air resistance can be ignored. 

 Which statement about the acceleration of the object due to gravity is correct? 

 A The acceleration depends on the mass of the object. 

 B The acceleration depends on the volume of the object. 

 C The acceleration is constant. 

 D The acceleration is initially zero and increases as the object falls. 

4 A cup contains hot liquid. 

 Some of the liquid evaporates. 

 What happens to the mass and what happens to the weight of the liquid in the cup? 

 mass weight 

 A decreases decreases 

 B decreases stays the same 

 C stays the same decreases 

 D stays the same stays the same 

5 An object moves in a circle at constant speed. 

 Which statement about the force needed on the object is correct? 

 A A force away from the centre of the circle keeps the object moving in the circle. 

 B A force in the direction of motion of the object keeps it moving in the circle. 

 C A force towards the centre of the circle keeps the object moving in the circle. 

 D No force is needed to keep the object moving at constant speed in the circle. 


© UCLES 2016 0625/23/M/J/16 

6 A long plank XY lies on the ground. A load of 120 N is placed on it, at a distance of 0.50 m from end X, as shown. 

 End Y is lifted off the ground. The upward force needed to do this is 65 N. 

### 120 N 

 0.50 m 1.5 m 2.0 m 

### 65 N 

### W 

### X Y 

 load 

 ground 

 In the diagram, W is the weight of the plank, acting at its mid-point. 

 What is the value of W? 

 A 35 N B 47 N C 100 N D 133 N 

7 Which list contains only vector quantities? 

 A energy, force, velocity 

 B speed, acceleration, force 

 C velocity, energy, acceleration 

 D velocity, force, acceleration 

8 A gas molecule strikes the wall of a container. The molecule rebounds with the same speed. 

 before hitting the wall after hitting the wall 

 wall gas molecule 

 wall gas molecule 

 What happens to the kinetic energy and what happens to the momentum of the molecule? 

 kinetic energy momentum 

 A changes changes 

 B changes stays the same 

 C stays the same changes 

 D stays the same stays the same 


© UCLES 2016 0625/23/M/J/16 [Turn over 

9 Which energy resource does not derive its energy from the Sun? 

 A hydroelectric 

 B nuclear fission 

 C waves 

 D wind 

10 The diagram shows the energy used by a modern lamp. 

 60 W input of electrical power 

 48 W of power wasted in heating surroundings 

 12 W of useful power output as light 

 Which expression gives the efficiency of the lamp? 

### A 

### 60 

### 12 

### × 100% B 

### 48 

### 12 

### × 100% C 

### 60 

### 48 

### × 100% D 

### 12 

### 48 

### × 100% 

11 Three boxes each weigh 100 N. A man lifts all the boxes together from the ground on to a shelf that is 1.5 m above the ground. The man takes 2.0 s to do this. 

 boxes shelf 

 1.5 m 

 How much useful power does the man produce to lift the boxes? 

 A 75 W B 225 W C 300 W D 900 W 


© UCLES 2016 0625/23/M/J/16 

12 A diver under water uses breathing apparatus at a depth where the pressure is 1.25 × 105 Pa. 

 A bubble of gas breathed out by the diver has a volume of 20 cm^3 when it is released. The bubble moves upwards to the surface of the water. 

 At the surface of the water, the atmospheric pressure is 1.00 × 105 Pa. 

 The temperature of the water is the same at all depths. 

 What is the volume of this bubble when it reaches the surface? 

 A 15 cm^3 B 16 cm^3 C 20 cm^3 D 25 cm^3 

13 The diagram shows a simple mercury barometer. 

 V 

### W 

### X 

### Y 

### Z 

 mercury 

 The atmospheric pressure increases. 

 Which distance increases? 

 A VW B WY C XY D XZ 

14 What causes the random, zig-zag movement (Brownian motion) of smoke particles suspended in air? 

 A air molecules colliding with smoke particles 

 B convection currents as the hot smoke rises 

 C smoke particles colliding with each other 

 D smoke particles reacting with oxygen molecules in the air 


© UCLES 2016 0625/23/M/J/16 [Turn over 

15 A sealed bottle of constant volume contains air. 

 The air in the bottle is heated by the Sun. 

 What is the effect on the average speed of the air molecules in the bottle, and the average distance between them? 

 average speed of air molecules 

 average distance between air molecules 

 A decreases decreases 

 B decreases stays the same 

 C increases increases 

 D increases stays the same 

16 The diagram shows a liquid-in-glass thermometer. 

### –10 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 

### °C 

 liquid thread 

 glass bulb stem 

 liquid 

 tube 

 How can the thermometer be made more sensitive? 

 A increase the internal diameter of the tube containing the liquid thread 

 B increase the internal volume of the glass bulb and the volume of the liquid 

 C increase the length of the tube and stem 

 D increase the thickness of the glass in the glass bulb 

17 In an experiment to measure specific heat capacity, a block of aluminium is heated and its rise in temperature is measured. 

 The amount of energy gained by the block is E. The mass of the block is m. The rise in temperature of the block is ∆T. 

 Which expression gives the specific heat capacity of aluminium? 

### A 

### E T 

 m ∆ 

### B 

### E 

 m ∆T C m T 

### E 

### ∆ 

### D 

 m 

### E ∆T 


© UCLES 2016 0625/23/M/J/16 

18 Which row shows the surface that is the better absorber and the surface that is the better emitter of infra-red radiation? 

 better absorber better emitter 

 A black surface black surface 

 B black surface white surface 

 C white surface black surface 

 D white surface white surface 

19 A student suggests some uses for containers made from good thermal conductors and for containers made from poor thermal conductors. 

 In which row are both suggested uses correct? 

 good thermal conductor poor thermal conductor 

 A keeping a cold liquid at a low temperature 

 transferring thermal energy quickly from a hot liquid 

 B keeping a hot liquid at a high temperature 

 keeping a cold liquid at a low temperature C transferring thermal energy quickly from a hot liquid 

 transferring thermal energy quickly to a cold liquid D transferring thermal energy quickly to a cold liquid 

 keeping a hot liquid at a high temperature 

20 A water wave passes into a region where the wave travels more slowly. 

 As it passes into the slow region, what happens to the frequency and what happens to the wavelength of the wave? 

 frequency wavelength 

 A decreases remains the same 

 B increases remains the same 

 C remains the same decreases 

 D remains the same increases 


© UCLES 2016 0625/23/M/J/16 [Turn over 

21 Which row shows the natures of light waves, sound waves and X-rays? 

 light waves sound waves X-rays 

 A longitudinal longitudinal transverse 

 B longitudinal transverse longitudinal 

 C transverse longitudinal transverse 

 D transverse transverse longitudinal 

22 The diagram shows an object in front of a plane mirror. The mirror forms an image of the object. 

### N 

### M 

 object 

 At which labelled point is the image formed, and which type of image is formed? 

 where the image is formed type of image 

 A at M real 

 B at M virtual 

 C at N real 

 D at N virtual 

23 Light enters a glass block at an angle of incidence of 46°. 

 The light refracts at an angle of refraction of 26°. 

 What is the refractive index of the glass? 

 A 0.57 B 0.61 C 1.64 D 1.77 


© UCLES 2016 0625/23/M/J/16 

24 The diagram shows a converging lens forming an image of an object. 

 image object 

### X 

### Y 

 Which statement about the image is correct? 

 A It is real and can be seen by an eye at X. 

 B It is real and can be seen by an eye at Y. 

 C It is virtual and can be seen by an eye at X. 

 D It is virtual and can be seen by an eye at Y. 

25 The sound from a loudspeaker must pass through two materials to reach a microphone. 

 material 1 material 2 

 loudspeaker microphone 

 Which combination of materials gives the shortest time for the sound to reach the microphone? 

 material 1 material 2 

 A air hydrogen 

 B air water 

 C copper aluminium 

 D water oil 

26 Which range of wave frequencies includes only sounds that can be heard by a human with normal hearing? 

 A 3.0 Hz to 300 Hz 

 B 30 Hz to 3000 Hz 

 C 300 Hz to 30 000 Hz 

 D 3000 Hz to 300 000 Hz 


© UCLES 2016 0625/23/M/J/16 [Turn over 

27 Each diagram shows two charged metal plates. 

 Which diagram shows the pattern and the direction of the electric field between the plates? 

### – – – – 

### + + + + 

### A 

### – – – – 

### + + + + 

### B 

### – – – – 

### + + + + 

### C D 

### – – – – 

### + + + + 

28 The four circuits shown all include an a.c. power supply, two diodes and a lamp. 

 In which circuit is there a rectified current in the lamp? 

 A 

### C D 

### B 


© UCLES 2016 0625/23/M/J/16 

29 The diagram shows a battery connected to two resistors. 

### R 

 Four students separately measure the electromotive force (e.m.f.) of the battery, the current in the resistors, and the potential difference (p.d.) across resistor R. 

 Their results are shown in the table below. 

 Which row shows values with their correct units? 

 e.m.f. current p.d. 

 A 3.0 A 0.30 V 1.5 A 

 B 3.0 A 0.30 A 1.5 V 

 C 3.0 V 0.30 V 1.5 A 

 D 3.0 V 0.30 A 1.5 V 

30 A 3.0 Ω resistor and a 6.0 Ω resistor are connected in parallel. 

### 6.0 Ω 

### 3.0 Ω 

 What is their combined resistance? 

 A 0.50 Ω B 2.0 Ω C 4.5 Ω D 9.0 Ω 


© UCLES 2016 0625/23/M/J/16 [Turn over 

31 The diagram shows a combination of logic gates. 

 input P 

(= 0) (^) output X input Q output Y (= 1) Input P is at a logic state 0 (low) and input Q is at a logic state 1 (high). What are the logic states at output X and at output Y? output X output Y A 0 0 B 0 1 C 1 0 D 1 1 32 The diagram shows part of a circuit used to switch street lamps on and off automatically. + 

### – 

### LDR 

 In the evening it gets dark. 

 Which row shows the effect on the resistance of the light-dependent resistor (LDR) and on the potential difference (p.d.) across it? 

 resistance of LDR p.d. across LDR 

 A decreases decreases 

 B decreases increases 

 C increases decreases 

 D increases increases 


© UCLES 2016 0625/23/M/J/16 

33 A domestic circuit includes a 30 A fuse. This protects the wiring if there is too much current in the circuit. 

 In which wire is the 30 A fuse positioned, and what does it do when it operates? 

 position operation 

 A live wire disconnects the circuit 

 B live wire reduces the current to 30 A 

 C neutral wire disconnects the circuit 

 D neutral wire reduces the current to 30 A 

34 A strong electromagnet is used to attract pins. 

 core 

 pins 

 coil 

 current 

 What happens when the current in the coil is halved? 

 A No pins are attracted. 

 B Some pins are attracted, but not as many. 

 C The same number of pins is attracted. 

 D More pins are attracted. 


© UCLES 2016 0625/23/M/J/16 [Turn over 

35 The diagram shows a transformer. 

 primary coil 800 turns 

 secondary coil 40 turns 

 input voltage 

 output voltage 

 The input voltage is 240 V. 

 What is the output voltage? 

 A 6.0 V B 12 V C 20 V D 40 V 

36 The diagram shows a shaded area where the direction of a magnetic field is into the page. 

 A beam of β-particles enters the field as shown. 

 magnetic field into the page 

 beam of β-particles 

 In which direction is the beam of β-particles deflected as they enter the magnetic field? 

 A into the page 

 B out of the page 

 C down the page 

 D up the page 


© UCLES 2016 0625/23/M/J/16 

37 Below are four statements about isotopes of a certain element. 

 Which statement about the isotopes must be correct? 

 A They are radioactive. 

 B They are unstable. 

 C They have the same number of neutrons. 

 D They have the same number of protons. 

38 Which diagram represents an experiment that provided evidence for the nuclear atom? 

 gold nucleus 

 α-particle 

### A 

 gold nucleus 

 β-particle 

### B 

 gold nucleus 

 α-particle β-particle 

### C 

 gold nucleus 

### D 

39 Sodium-24 decays to magnesium-24 according to the following equation. 

 24 11 Na^ →^ 

 24 12 Mg^ + emitted particle 

 What is the emitted particle? 

 A α-particle 

 B β-particle 

 C neutron 

 D proton 


© UCLES 2016 0625/23/M/J/16 

40 The reading on a detector placed near a radioactive material is 536 counts per second. 

 The background count rate is 44 counts per second. 

 The half-life of the radioactive material is 34 hours. 

 What is the reading on the detector after 68 hours? 

 A 44 counts per second 

 B 123 counts per second 

 C 134 counts per second 

 D 167 counts per second 


© UCLES 2016 0625/23/M/J/16 

### BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2016 0625/23/M/J/16 

### BLANK PAGE 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2016 0625/23/M/J/16 

### BLANK PAGE 


