® IGCSE is the registered trademark of Cambridge International Examinations. 

 This syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 6 printed pages. 

© UCLES 2016 [Turn over 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

PHYSICS 0625/61 

Paper 6 Alternative to Practical May/June 2016 

MARK SCHEME 

Maximum Mark: 40 

 Published 

This mark scheme is published as an aid to teachers and candidates, to indicate the requirements of the examination. It shows the basis on which Examiners were instructed to award marks. It does not indicate the details of the discussions that took place at an Examiners’ meeting before marking began, which would have considered the acceptability of alternative answers. 

Mark schemes should be read in conjunction with the question paper and the Principal Examiner Report for Teachers. 

Cambridge will not enter into discussions about these mark schemes. 

Cambridge is publishing the mark schemes for the May/June 2016 series for most Cambridge IGCSE®, Cambridge International A and AS Level components and some Cambridge O Level components. 


 Page 2 Mark Scheme Syllabus Paper Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 0625 61 

 © Cambridge International Examinations 2016 

## NOTES ABOUT MARK SCHEME SYMBOLS AND OTHER MATTERS 

Brackets ( ) Brackets around words or units in the mark scheme are intended to indicate wording used to clarify the mark scheme, but the marks do not depend on seeing the words or units in brackets, e.g. 10 (J) means that the mark is scored for 10, regardless of the unit given. 

Underlining Underlining indicates that this must be seen in the answer offered, or something very similar. 

OR / or This indicates alternative answers or words, any one of which is satisfactory for scoring the marks. 

AND Both answers or words must be given for credit to be awarded. 

e.e.o.o. This means “each error or omission”. 

o.w.t.t.e. This means “or words to that effect”. 

c.a.o. This means “correct answer only”. 

NOT This indicates that an incorrect answer is not to be disregarded, but cancels another otherwise correct alternative offered by the candidate, i.e. right plus wrong penalty applies. 

e.c.f. This means “error carried forward”. If a candidate has made an earlier mistake and has carried an incorrect value forward to subsequent stages of working, marks indicated by e.c.f. may be awarded, provided the subsequent working is correct, bearing in mind the earlier mistake. This prevents a candidate from being penalised more than once for a particular mistake, but only applies to marks annotated e.c.f. 


Page 3 

Mark Scheme 

Syllabus 

Paper 

 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 

## 0625 

## 61 

 © Cambridge International Examinations 2016 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 1(a)(i) 

## A 

 and 

## B 

 values correct 

## A:40.0, 35.0, 30.0, 25.0, 20.0B:34.0, 28.8, 24.0, 19.2, 14.0 

 1(a)(ii) 

 cm, cm, N 

 cm, N 

 cm 

 1(b) 

 Graph: Axes correctly labelled with quantity, right way roundAppropriate scales, starting at origin (0,0)All plots correct to ½ small squareGood line judgement, thin, continuous, single line through the plots; with neat plots 

 1(c) 

 Method shown on graph and Y correct to ½ small square. 

 1(d) 

## W 

 = 1.0–1.4. No ecf 

 1(e) 

 Difficulty of achieving balance or other sensible suggestion 

 1(f) 

 Expect agree; allow ecf. Explanation includes idea of close enough (or, ecf, too different) 

 Total 10 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 2(a) 

 8.20.44–0.45Units V and A 

 2(b) 

## 19(°C) 

 2(c) 

 Perpendicular to scale and at bottom of meniscus 

 Total 5 


Page 4 

Mark Scheme 

Syllabus 

Paper 

 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 

## 0625 

## 61 

 © Cambridge International Examinations 2016 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 3(a)(i) 

## R 

 values 1.60, 1.51, 1.35, 1.21 R 

 values all to 2 significant figures or all to 3 significant figures. 

 3(a)(ii) 

 Column headings m, V, A, 

## Ω 

 3(b) 

 No; there is a current reading 

 3(c) 

 filament changes brightness, owtteincrease 

 /^ decrease 

 /^ change in temperature of filament 

 /^ lamp 

 3(d)(i) 

 Variable resistor (rheostat) 

 3(d)(ii) 

 Correct symbol for variable resistorCorrect diagram, with variable resistor in series with power supply 

 Total 9 


Page 5 

Mark Scheme 

Syllabus 

Paper 

 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 

## 0625 

## 61 

 © Cambridge International Examinations 2016 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

## 4 

## MP1 

 Uses same container throughout 

## MP2 

 Hot water in container (any) and takes temperatures at intervals or at start and after a fixed timeOR Hot water in container (any) and takes time for a fixed temperature fall. 

## MP3 

 Repeats with different insulators (all three used) 

## MP 4&5 

 Any two from:Constant room temperatureSame starting temperatures 

 (clearly stated) 

 Same volumes of hot water 

 (clearly stated) 

 Same thickness/amount of insulatorUse container 

 without insulation 

 Use of a lidInsulates bottom of containerUses the copper can only 

## MP6 

 Table or tables as appropriate to method: Temperatures with unit °C 

 and time with unit s (or min) and different 

 insulators shown 

## MP7 

 Use of readings: graph of temperature against time 

 OR compare results and comment that longest time to cool = best insulator or smallest drop in temperature in fixed time= best insulator (or reverse arguments) 

 Total 7 


Page 6 

Mark Scheme 

Syllabus 

Paper 

 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 

## 0625 

## 61 

 © Cambridge International Examinations 2016 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 5(a) 

 u^ 

## = 50, 

 v 

## = 21 

 5(b)(i) 

## U 

## = 500, 

## V 

 = 210 ecf from 

 (a) 

 5(b)(ii) 

 f^1 

 = 148 or 150 or 147.9 (mm) ecf from 

 (i) 

 2 or 3 significant figures 

 5(c) 

 f^2 

 136 (mm) c.a.o. 

 5(d) 

 Yes 

 /^ statement is correct, owtte (6 

 mm) difference is very small 

 /^ within limits of experimental error 

 / Difference explained by uncertainty in her focal length 

 measurement 

 5(e) 

 Any two from:Use of darkened room 

 /^ brighter lamp 

 Mark position of centre of lens on holderPlace metre rule on bench (or clamp in position)Ensure object and (centre of) lens are same height(from the bench)Object and lens and screen perpendicular to benchMove screen (slowly) back and forth to obtain best image (owtte)Ensure rule is touching object 

 /^ lens 

 /^ holder 

 /^ screen or look perpendicular to ruler 

 Total 9 


