® IGCSE is the registered trademark of Cambridge International Examinations. 

 This syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 6 printed pages. 

© UCLES 2016 [Turn over 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

PHYSICS 0625/63 

Paper 6 Alternative to Practical May/June 2016 

MARK SCHEME 

Maximum Mark: 40 

 Published 

This mark scheme is published as an aid to teachers and candidates, to indicate the requirements of the examination. It shows the basis on which Examiners were instructed to award marks. It does not indicate the details of the discussions that took place at an Examiners’ meeting before marking began, which would have considered the acceptability of alternative answers. 

Mark schemes should be read in conjunction with the question paper and the Principal Examiner Report for Teachers. 

Cambridge will not enter into discussions about these mark schemes. 

Cambridge is publishing the mark schemes for the May/June 2016 series for most Cambridge IGCSE®, Cambridge International A and AS Level components and some Cambridge O Level components. 


 Page 2 Mark Scheme Syllabus Paper Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 0625 63 

 © Cambridge International Examinations 2016 

## NOTES ABOUT MARK SCHEME SYMBOLS AND OTHER MATTERS 

Brackets ( ) Brackets around words or units in the mark scheme are intended to indicate wording used to clarify the mark scheme, but the marks do not depend on seeing the words or units in brackets, e.g. 10 (J) means that the mark is scored for 10, regardless of the unit given. 

Underlining Underlining indicates that this must be seen in the answer offered, or something very similar. 

OR / or This indicates alternative answers or words, any one of which is satisfactory for scoring the marks. 

AND Both answers or words must be given for credit to be awarded. 

e.e.o.o. This means “each error or omission”. 

o.w.t.t.e. This means “or words to that effect”. 

c.a.o. This means “correct answer only”. 

NOT This indicates that an incorrect answer is not to be disregarded, but cancels another otherwise correct alternative offered by the candidate, i.e. right plus wrong penalty applies. 

e.c.f. This means “error carried forward”. If a candidate has made an earlier mistake and has carried an incorrect value forward to subsequent stages of working, marks indicated by e.c.f. may be awarded, provided the subsequent working is correct, bearing in mind the earlier mistake. This prevents a candidate from being penalised more than once for a particular mistake, but only applies to marks annotated e.c.f. 


Page 3 

Mark Scheme 

Syllabus 

Paper 

 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 

## 0625 

## 63 

 © Cambridge International Examinations 2016 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 1(a) 

 θ^ 

 R^ 

## = 21(°C) 

 1(b) 

 s, °C , °Ctime values correct 30, 60, 90, 120, 150, 180 

 1(c)(i) 

 ‘thermometer 

## A 

 cools more rapidly’ and ‘greater overall temperature change’ 

 reference to ‘in the same time’ 

 1(c)(ii) 

 rate increases then decreases OR cooling is less in first 30 

 s than in subsequent 30 

 s periods 

 1(d)(i) 

 makes comparison fair 

 /^ only one factor changed 

 1(d)(ii) 

 causes start temperature to be lower 

 1(e) 

 any two appropriate factors:e.g. start temperature,room temperature,draughts,humidity,amount of insulation,type of thermometer 

 Total: 10 


Page 4 

Mark Scheme 

Syllabus 

Paper 

 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 

## 0625 

## 63 

 © Cambridge International Examinations 2016 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 2(a) 

 indication of taking mean reading 

 /^ deducing half load length and adding or subtracting 

 scale reading 

## = 70(.0) 

 2(b) 

## F 

 values=1.45, 2.20, 2.80, 3.55, 4.05 consistent 2 dp 

 2(c) 

 graph: •^ 

 axes labelled with quantity and unit 

-^ 

 appropriate scales (plots occupying at least ½ grid) 

-^ 

 plots all correct to ½ small square 

-^ 

 well judged straight line and thin line, precise plots 

 2(d)(i) 

 y^ 

 read correctly from graph 

 2(d)(ii) 

## W 

 in range 1.4 to 2.0 to 2 or 3 sig fig and with unit of N 

 2(e) 

 any suitable source on inaccuracy, e.g.: •^ 

 rule not uniform 

 /^ weight not distributed evenly, 

## •^ 

 load slips on rule, 

-^ 

 forcemeter not at zero to start, 

-^ 

 load values not exact 

 Total: 12 


Page 5 

Mark Scheme 

Syllabus 

Paper 

 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 

## 0625 

## 63 

 © Cambridge International Examinations 2016 

 Answer 

 Marks 

## 3 

 apparatus: diagram – lens, (illuminated) object, screen in suitable order for experimentin line on flat surface instructions: set 

 /^ measure object distance, move screen to get image, measure image height, repeat for different object distances limiting factor for range of object distances – one from: •^ 

 image virtual 

 /^ too big for screen, 

## •^ 

 image too dim 

 /^ too small to measure, 

## •^ 

 must be greater than focal length 

 graph: image size 

 /^ magnification against object distance 

 precaution: any one suitable precaution and consequence of not taking it, e.g. •^ 

 dark room 

 /^ bright light – image might not be distinct, 

## •^ 

 lens and object at same height – image might not appear on screen, 

-^ 

 lens, object and screen perpendicular – image might be distorted, 

-^ 

 fix rule – may move and give incorrect distances 

-^ 

 mark position of lens on holder – cannot judge correct measurements 

 /^ owtte 

## •^ 

 detailed means of obtaining a sharp image – might not be correctly focused 

-^ 

 means of measuring image height accurately – might be obscured 

 Total: 7 


Page 6 

Mark Scheme 

Syllabus 

Paper 

 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 

## 0625 

## 63 

 © Cambridge International Examinations 2016 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 4(a) 

 correct voltmeter symbol in parallel with lamp 

## P 

 4(b) 

## I^ 

## = 0.23 

 unit of A 

 4(c) 

## V 

 P^ 

 = 2.7 and 

## V 

 Q^ 

## = 0.3 

 4(d)(i) 

 some current in the circuit,pd across lamp 

## Q 

 is small 

 /^ not equal to supply voltage 

 /^ reference to lamp 

## P 

 bright and is in series 

 4(d)(ii) 

## V 

 P^ 

 greater than 

 /^ near working voltage 

## V 

 Q^ 

 much less than working voltage 

 4(e) 

## R 

 = 13(.0) allow ecf 2 

 /^ 3sig figs and unit of 

## Ω 

 4(f) 

 statement matches resultssome correct values used and reference to ‘within limits of experimental accuracy’ 

 /^ owtte 

 Total: 11 


