® IGCSE is the registered trademark of Cambridge International Examinations. 

 This document consists of 6 printed pages. 

© UCLES 2016 [Turn over 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

PHYSICS 0625/52 

Paper 5 Practical Test May/June 2016 

MARK SCHEME 

Maximum Mark: 40 

 Published 

This mark scheme is published as an aid to teachers and candidates, to indicate the requirements of the examination. It shows the basis on which Examiners were instructed to award marks. It does not indicate the details of the discussions that took place at an Examiners’ meeting before marking began, which would have considered the acceptability of alternative answers. 

Mark schemes should be read in conjunction with the question paper and the Principal Examiner Report for Teachers. 

Cambridge will not enter into discussions about these mark schemes. 

Cambridge is publishing the mark schemes for the May/June 2016 series for most Cambridge IGCSE®, Cambridge International A and AS Level components and some Cambridge O Level components. 


 Page 2 Mark Scheme Syllabus Paper Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 0625 52 

 © Cambridge International Examinations 2016 

## NOTES ABOUT MARK SCHEME SYMBOLS AND OTHER MATTERS 

Brackets ( ) Brackets around words or units in the mark scheme are intended to indicate wording used to clarify the mark scheme, but the marks do not depend on seeing the words or units in brackets, e.g. 10 (J) means that the mark is scored for 10, regardless of the unit given. 

Underlining Underlining indicates that this must be seen in the answer offered, or something very similar. 

OR / or This indicates alternative answers or words, any one of which is satisfactory for scoring the marks. 

AND Both answers or words must be given for credit to be awarded. 

e.e.o.o. This means "each error or omission". 

o.w.t.t.e. This means “or words to that effect”. 

c.a.o. This means “correct answer only”. 

NOT This indicates that an incorrect answer is not to be disregarded, but cancels another otherwise correct alternative offered by the candidate, i.e. right plus wrong penalty applies. 

e.c.f. This means "error carried forward". If a candidate has made an earlier mistake and has carried an incorrect value forward to subsequent stages of working, marks indicated by e.c.f. may be awarded, provided the subsequent working is correct, bearing in mind the earlier mistake. This prevents a candidate from being penalised more than once for a particular mistake, but only applies to marks annotated e.c.f. 


Page 3 

Mark Scheme 

Syllabus 

Paper 

 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 

## 0625 

## 52 

 © Cambridge International Examinations 2016 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 1(a) 

## S 

 0 

 in the range 200 to 600 

 mm 

 table: S 

 values increasing and first > 

## S 

 0 

 e^ 

 values correct 

 1(b) 

 viewing scale at right angles or use of straight edge, set square, pointer between bottom of spring and scale or otherfiducial aid 

 1(c) 

 graph:axes correctly labelled with quantity and unitappropriate scales (plots occupying at least 

## ½ 

 grid) 

 all plots correct to ½ small squarewell-judged judgement, thin, continuous line, neat plots 

 1(d) 

## S 

 X^ 

 between 3N and 4N in table 

 and 

## ( 

## S 

 X^ 

## −^ 

## S 

## ) 0 

 correct method clearly shown on graph W 

 in the range 3.3 to 3.5 

 and 

 correct unit 

 Total 11 


Page 4 

Mark Scheme 

Syllabus 

Paper 

 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 

## 0625 

## 52 

 © Cambridge International Examinations 2016 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 2(a),(b) 

 table:°C seen at least once with no contradictionall temperatures recordedtemperatures decreasing in all beakersleast decrease in beaker 

## A 

## /^ 

 greatest in beaker 

## B 

 evidence of temperature readings to at least 1 

## °C 

 2(c)(i) 

 first box ticked 

 2(c)(ii) 

 clear reference to readings with examples of temperature differences 

 2(d) 

 any 

 two 

 from: 

## •^ 

 room temperature (or suitable reference to draughts or similar) 

-^ 

 starting temperature (of water) 

-^ 

 density of packing 

 /^ amount 

 /^ type of insulation 

## •^ 

 thickness of lids 

 /^ identical lids 

 2(e) 

 perpendicular viewing 

 /^ view scale at right angles 

 /^ eye level 

 reading to bottom of meniscus 

 Total 11 


Page 5 

Mark Scheme 

Syllabus 

Paper 

 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 

## 0625 

## 52 

 © Cambridge International Examinations 2016 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 3(a)(i) 

 a^ 

 = 19 to 21 

 (cm) 

 3(a)(ii) 

 b^ 

 = 59 to 61 

 (cm) 

 3(a)(iii) 

 m 

 1 

 correct, no unit 

 and 

 2/3 significant figures only 

 3(a)(iv) 

 h^1 

 = 4.0 to 5.0 

 (cm) 

 3(b)(i) 

 x^ 

 = 59 to 61 

 (cm) 

 and 

 y 

 = 19 to 21 

 (cm) 

 3(b)(ii) 

 m 

 2 

 in range. 0.3 to 1.0 

 and 

 h 

 2 

## < 1.5 

 (cm) 

 m 

 1 

## ×^ 

 m 

 2 

 = 0.9 to 1.1 

 3(c) 

 statement matching resultsjustification to include idea of within (or beyond) limits of experimental accuracy 

 3(d) 

 any 

 two 

 from: 

## •^ 

 use of darkened room 

 /^ brighter lamp 

## /^ 

 no other lights 

## •^ 

 mark position of centre of lens on holder 

-^ 

 place metre rule on bench (or clamp in position) 

-^ 

 ensure object and centre of lens are same height above bench 

-^ 

 move the 

 lens 

 slowly 

## /^ 

 to and fro (when focussing) 

## •^ 

 lens, object and screen vertical 

 /^ perpendicular to bench 

## •^ 

 repeat with different 

## D 

## •^ 

 use of graph paper 

## /^ 

 cm scale on screen to measure image 

 Total 11 


Page 6 

Mark Scheme 

Syllabus 

Paper 

 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 

## 0625 

## 52 

 © Cambridge International Examinations 2016 

 Answer 

 Marks 

## 4 

 circuit diagram sample of wire must be clearly identifiable by a label on the diagram or by letters on the diagram with an explanation inthe text 

 and 

 the voltmeter must be in parallel with the 

 total length of the wire 

 and an ammeter placed in series with 

 the wireall circuit symbols correct method take readings of 

## V 

 and 

## I 

 use of a variety of lengthsrange of lengths between 5 

 cm and 2 

 m 

 with the largest length at least twice the smallest 

 table headings: 

 l^ 

 /^ m, 

## V 

## /^ V, 

## I 

## /^ A, 

## R 

## /^ 

## Ω 

 key variables to control any 

 one 

 from: 

## •^ 

 material 

## /^ 

 resistivity 

 /^ conductivity of wire 

## •^ 

 diameter 

 /^ radius 

 /^ thickness 

 /^ cross sectional area of wire 

## •^ 

 temperature of wire 

 Total 7 


