 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 16 printed pages. 

 IB16 06_0625_12/2RP © UCLES 2016 [Turn over 

## *8209657760* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

### PHYSICS 0625/12 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) May/June 2016 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A, B, C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. Take the weight of 1.0 kg to be 10 N (acceleration of free fall = 10 m / s^2 ). 


© UCLES 2016 0625/12/M/J/16 

1 The diagram shows an enlarged drawing of the end of a metre rule. It is being used to measure the length of a small feather. 

# 1 

# mm 

cm (^2 3) 

# 1 0 2 0 3 0 

 What is the length of the feather? 

 A 19 mm B 29 mm C 19 cm D 29 cm 

2 The graph shows how the speed of a van changes with time for part of its journey. 

 In which labelled section is the van decelerating? 

### 0 

### 0 

 speed 

 A B C D time 

3 A large stone is dropped from a bridge into a river. Air resistance can be ignored. 

 Which row describes the acceleration and the speed of the stone as it falls? 

 acceleration of the stone 

 speed of the stone 

 A constant constant 

 B constant increasing 

 C increasing constant 

 D increasing increasing 


© UCLES 2016 0625/12/M/J/16 [Turn over 

4 A cup contains hot liquid. 

 Some of the liquid evaporates. 

 What happens to the mass and what happens to the weight of the liquid in the cup? 

 mass weight 

 A decreases decreases 

 B decreases stays the same 

 C stays the same decreases 

 D stays the same stays the same 

5 A boy throws a stone. The stone leaves the boy’s hand and moves vertically upwards. Air resistance can be ignored. 

 How should the force on the stone be described just after the stone leaves the boy’s hand? 

 A downwards and constant 

 B downwards and increasing 

 C upwards and constant 

 D upwards and decreasing 

6 The diagrams show the dimensions and masses of four regular solid objects. The objects are made from different metals. 

 Which metal has the greatest density? 

 A 

 mass = 20 g 

 1.0 cm 

2.0 cm 2.0 cm 

### B 

 mass = 6.0 g 

 1.0 cm 

1.0 cm (^) 1.0 cm 

### C 

 mass = 14 g 

1.0 cm (^) 1.0 cm 2.0 cm 

### D 

 mass = 32 g 

 2.0 cm 

 2.0 cm 2.0 cm 


© UCLES 2016 0625/12/M/J/16 

7 A car travels along a straight road. 

 The speed-time graph for this journey is shown. 

 During which labelled part of the journey is the resultant force on the car zero? 

 time 

 speed 

### 0 

### 0 

### A 

### B 

### C 

### D 

8 The diagrams show four objects A, B, C and D. The centre of mass M of each object is marked on the diagrams. 

 Which object is not in equilibrium? 

 A B C D 

### M 

### M 

### M M 

9 A skier walks from the bottom of a ski slope to the top and gains 10 000 J of gravitational potential energy. 

 She skis down the slope. At the bottom of the slope, her kinetic energy is 2000 J. 

 How much energy is dissipated in overcoming friction and air resistance as the skier moves down the slope? 

 A 2000 J B 8000 J C 10 000 J D 12 000 J 


© UCLES 2016 0625/12/M/J/16 [Turn over 

10 Which energy source is one that is used to boil water to make steam in power stations? 

 A energy from tides 

 B energy from waves 

 C hydroelectric energy 

 D nuclear energy 

11 In a factory, two men X and Y try to move identical heavy boxes P and Q. 

 Man X tries to push box P along the floor. The box does not move because an object is in the way. 

 Man Y lifts box Q from the floor onto a shelf. 

 box P 

 box Q 

man X (^) man Y direction of force direction of force object shelf Which man does the most work on the box, and which box gains the most energy? man doing most work box gaining most energy A X P B X Q C Y P D Y Q 


© UCLES 2016 0625/12/M/J/16 

12 A T-shaped girder is placed on the ground in position X. It is then turned over to position Y. 

 position X position Y 

 ground 

 What happens to the force on the ground and what happens to the pressure on the ground? 

 force pressure 

 A increases increases 

 B increases remains the same 

 C remains the same increases 

 D remains the same remains the same 

13 The diagram shows a simple mercury barometer. 

 V 

### W 

### X 

### Y 

### Z 

 mercury 

 The atmospheric pressure increases. 

 Which distance increases? 

 A VW B WY C XY D XZ 


© UCLES 2016 0625/12/M/J/16 [Turn over 

14 A liquid is evaporating. The liquid is not boiling. 

 Which statement about the liquid is correct? 

 A Any molecule can escape, and from any part of the liquid. 

 B Any molecule can escape, but only from the liquid surface. 

 C Only molecules with enough energy can escape, and only from the liquid surface. 

 D Only molecules with enough energy can escape, but from any part of the liquid. 

15 The diagram shows a quantity of gas enclosed in a cylinder by a piston. 

 gas 

 cylinder piston 

 moves to the left 

 moves to the right 

 The piston is moved to the left or to the right. The temperature of the gas is kept constant. 

 Which row describes the effect of moving the piston slowly in the direction shown in the table? 

 movement of piston 

 speed of gas molecules 

 pressure of gas 

 A to the left increases decreases 

 B to the left no change increases 

 C to the right increases decreases 

 D to the right no change increases 

16 Which statement describes what happens as ice at 0 °C starts to melt to become water? 

 A Energy is absorbed and the temperature remains constant. 

 B Energy is absorbed and the temperature rises. 

 C Energy is released and the temperature remains constant. 

 D Energy is released and the temperature rises. 

17 What is meant by the fixed points of the scale of a liquid-in-glass thermometer? 

 A the distance between one scale division and the next 

 B the highest and lowest temperatures that the thermometer can record 

 C the maximum and minimum depth to which the thermometer should be submerged in a liquid 

 D the two agreed temperatures used for marking the temperature scale 


© UCLES 2016 0625/12/M/J/16 

18 A liquid at room temperature fills a flask and a glass tube to level X. 

### X 

### Y 

 liquid 

 The flask is now placed in ice, and the liquid level in the tube falls to level Y. 

 Why does the level fall? 

 A The flask contracts. 

 B The flask expands. 

 C The liquid contracts. 

 D The liquid expands. 

19 Which process involves convection? 

 A bread toasting under a grill 

 B energy from the Sun warming a road surface 

 C hot air rising to the top of a cool room 

 D thermal energy transfer through a copper bar 

20 A rod is made half of glass and half of copper. Four pins A, B, C and D are attached to the rod by wax. The rod is heated in the centre as shown. 

 The pins fall off when the wax melts. 

 Which pin falls off first? 

 heat 

 pin A 

 pin B 

 pin C 

 pin D 

 glass copper 


© UCLES 2016 0625/12/M/J/16 [Turn over 

21 Which row shows the natures of light waves, sound waves and X-rays? 

 light waves sound waves X-rays 

 A longitudinal longitudinal transverse 

 B longitudinal transverse longitudinal 

 C transverse longitudinal transverse 

 D transverse transverse longitudinal 

22 Radio waves are received at a house at the bottom of a hill. 

 hill 

 radio waves 

 house 

 The waves reach the house because the hill has caused them to be 

 A diffracted. 

 B radiated. 

 C reflected. 

 D refracted. 


© UCLES 2016 0625/12/M/J/16 

23 The diagram shows a ray of light in air incident on a glass block. Some of the light is refracted, and some of the light is reflected. Two angles p and q are marked on the diagram. 

 air glass 

 p 

 q 

 ray of light 

 Which row gives the angle of incidence and shows whether the ray undergoes total internal reflection? 

 angle of incidence 

 total internal reflection 

 A p no 

 B p yes 

 C q no 

 D q yes 

24 Visible light has a frequency of approximately 5.0 × 1014 Hz. 

 M and N are two other types of electromagnetic radiation. 

 The frequency of M is 5.0 × 106 Hz. 

 The frequency of N is 5.0 × 1015 Hz. 

 Which types of radiation are M and N? 

### M N 

 A radio waves infra-red 

 B radio waves ultraviolet 

 C ultraviolet X-rays 

 D X-rays infra-red 

25 What is the approximate range of hearing of a healthy human ear? 

 A 2.0 Hz to 2.0 kHz 

 B 2.0 Hz to 20 kHz 

 C 20 Hz to 2.0 kHz 

 D 20 Hz to 20 kHz 


© UCLES 2016 0625/12/M/J/16 [Turn over 

26 A singer sings two notes. The first note is louder and lower in pitch than the second note. 

 Which statement about the two notes is correct? 

 A The first note has a larger amplitude and a larger frequency than the second note. 

 B The first note has a larger amplitude and a smaller frequency than the second note. 

 C The first note has a smaller amplitude and a larger frequency than the second note. 

 D The first note has a smaller amplitude and a smaller frequency than the second note. 

27 Two nickel bars are placed close to the N-pole of a bar magnet. 

 The nickel bars become magnetised. 

### S N P Q 

magnet (^) nickel bars Which row states the pole induced at P, the pole induced at Q, and the type of magnetic force between P and Q? pole induced at P pole induced at Q force between P and Q A N S attraction B N S repulsion C S N attraction D S N repulsion 28 A student wishes to make a permanent magnet. She has an iron rod and a steel rod. Which rod should she use to make the permanent magnet, and is this rod a hard magnetic material or a soft magnetic material? rod type of magneticmaterial A iron hard B iron soft C steel hard D steel soft 


© UCLES 2016 0625/12/M/J/16 

29 Two meters are connected in a circuit to measure the current in a component and the potential difference across the component. 

 Which meters are used and how are they connected to the component? 

 A an ammeter in parallel for current, a voltmeter in series for potential difference 

 B an ammeter in series for current, a voltmeter in parallel for potential difference 

 C a voltmeter in parallel for current, an ammeter in series for potential difference 

 D a voltmeter in series for current, an ammeter in parallel for potential difference 

30 A wire has a certain electrical resistance. 

 The diameter and length of the wire may be changed. 

 Which pair of changes must cause the resistance of the wire to increase? 

 change of diameter 

 change of length 

 A decrease decrease 

 B decrease increase 

 C increase decrease 

 D increase increase 

31 P and Q are the circuit symbols for two electrical components. 

### P Q 

 Which components are represented by P and by Q? 

### P Q 

 A thermistor fuse 

 B thermistor relay 

 C variable resistor fuse 

 D variable resistor relay 


© UCLES 2016 0625/12/M/J/16 [Turn over 

32 The diagram shows two resistors connected in a circuit. 

### 6.0 Ω 

### 12 Ω 

 What could be the combined resistance of this arrangement of resistors? 

 A 4.0 Ω B 6.0 Ω C 9.0 Ω D 18 Ω 

33 The diagram shows part of a circuit used to switch street lamps on and off automatically. 

 + 

### – 

### LDR 

 In the evening it gets dark. 

 Which row shows the effect on the resistance of the light-dependent resistor (LDR) and on the potential difference (p.d.) across it? 

 resistance of LDR p.d. across LDR 

 A decreases decreases 

 B decreases increases 

 C increases decreases 

 D increases increases 


© UCLES 2016 0625/12/M/J/16 

34 A domestic circuit includes a 30 A fuse. This protects the wiring if there is too much current in the circuit. 

 In which wire is the 30 A fuse positioned, and what does it do when it operates? 

 position operation 

 A live wire disconnects the circuit 

 B live wire reduces the current to 30 A 

 C neutral wire disconnects the circuit 

 D neutral wire reduces the current to 30 A 

35 A strong electromagnet is used to attract pins. 

 core 

 pins 

 coil 

 current 

 What happens when the current in the coil is halved? 

 A No pins are attracted. 

 B Some pins are attracted, but not as many. 

 C The same number of pins is attracted. 

 D More pins are attracted. 


© UCLES 2016 0625/12/M/J/16 [Turn over 

36 The diagram shows a transformer. 

 primary coil 800 turns 

 secondary coil 40 turns 

 input voltage 

 output voltage 

 The input voltage is 240 V. 

 What is the output voltage? 

 A 6.0 V B 12 V C 20 V D 40 V 

37 A neutral atom consists of electrons orbiting a nucleus. The nucleus contains protons and neutrons. 

 Which statement about the atom must be correct? 

 A The number of electrons is equal to the number of neutrons. 

 B The number of electrons is equal to the number of protons. 

 C The number of neutrons is equal to the number of protons. 

 D The number of electrons, neutrons and protons are all different. 

38 Below are the symbols for five different nuclides. 

(^3517) X (^3717) X (^3818) X 3581 X 3781 X nuclide 1 nuclide 2 nuclide 3 nuclide 4 nuclide 5 Which two nuclides are isotopes of the same element? A nuclide 1 and nuclide 2 B nuclide 2 and nuclide 3 C nuclide 2 and nuclide 5 D nuclide 4 and nuclide 5 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2016 0625/12/M/J/16 

39 Which row describes the nature and a property of all β-particles? 

 nature property 

 A electrons can travel through a vacuum 

 B electrons stopped by a thin sheet of paper 

 C helium nuclei can travel through a vacuum 

 D helium nuclei stopped by a thin sheet of paper 

40 The graph shows how the decay rate of a radioactive source changes with time. 

 4000 

### 3000 

### 2000 

### 1000 

### 0 

### 0 2 4 6 8 10 

 time / days 

 decay rate decays / s 

 What will be the activity at 8 days? 

 A 0 decays / s 

 B 125 decays / s 

 C 250 decays / s 

 D 500 decays / s 


