 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 17 printed pages and 3 blank pages. 

 IB16 06_0625_11/2RP © UCLES 2016 [Turn over 

## *1549637503* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

### PHYSICS 0625/11 

 Paper 1 Multiple Choice (Core) May/June 2016 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A, B, C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. Take the weight of 1.0 kg to be 10 N (acceleration of free fall = 10 m / s^2 ). 


© UCLES 2016 0625/11/M/J/16 

1 The diagram shows an enlarged drawing of the end of a metre rule. It is being used to measure the length of a small feather. 

# 1 

# mm 

cm (^2 3) 

# 1 0 2 0 3 0 

 What is the length of the feather? 

 A 19 mm B 29 mm C 19 cm D 29 cm 

2 A train begins a journey from a station and travels 60 km in a time of 20 minutes. 

 What is the average speed of the train? 

 A 3.0 m / s B 5.0 m / s C 50 m / s D 60 m / s 

3 Two runners take part in a race. 

 The graph shows how the speed of each runner changes with time. 

### 0 

### 0 

 speed 

 time 

 runner 1 

 runner 2 

 t 

 What does the graph show about the runners at time t? 

 A Both runners are moving at the same speed. 

 B Runner 1 has zero acceleration. 

 C Runner 1 is overtaking runner 2. 

 D Runner 2 is slowing down. 


© UCLES 2016 0625/11/M/J/16 [Turn over 

4 A cup contains hot liquid. 

 Some of the liquid evaporates. 

 What happens to the mass and what happens to the weight of the liquid in the cup? 

 mass weight 

 A decreases decreases 

 B decreases stays the same 

 C stays the same decreases 

 D stays the same stays the same 

5 An object has a mass of 50 kg. 

 The gravitational field strength on Earth is 10.0 N / kg. 

 The gravitational field strength on a distant planet is 4.0 N / kg. 

 What is the weight of the object on Earth, and what is its weight on the distant planet? 

 on Earth on the distant planet 

 A 5.0 kg 12.5 kg 

 B 5.0 N 12.5 N 

 C 500 kg 200 kg 

 D 500 N 200 N 


© UCLES 2016 0625/11/M/J/16 

6 A student wishes to determine the density of an irregularly-shaped stone. 

 First he finds the mass of the stone. Next he lowers the stone into a measuring cylinder containing water. 

 The diagrams show the measuring cylinder before and after the stone is lowered into it. 

 stone 

 stone 

 water 

 water 

 reading 2 

 reading 1 

 How should the student calculate the density of the stone? 

 A mass of stone × reading 2 

 B mass of stone × (reading 2 – reading 1) 

 C mass of stone ÷ reading 2 

 D mass of stone ÷ (reading 2 – reading 1) 

7 Which is an example of a force? 

 A energy 

 B power 

 C pressure 

 D weight 


© UCLES 2016 0625/11/M/J/16 [Turn over 

8 The diagram shows an object of weight W and an object of weight Z balanced on a uniform metre rule. 

 pivot 

 50 cm mark 

 a b object of weight W 

 object of weight Z 

 metre rule 

 Which equation relating to W, Z, a and b is correct? 

### A 

 b 

### Z 

 a 

### W 

### = 

 B W × Z = a × b 

 C W × a = Z × b 

 D W × (a + b) = Z 

9 A skier walks from the bottom of a ski slope to the top and gains 10 000 J of gravitational potential energy. 

 She skis down the slope. At the bottom of the slope, her kinetic energy is 2000 J. 

 How much energy is dissipated in overcoming friction and air resistance as the skier moves down the slope? 

 A 2000 J B 8000 J C 10 000 J D 12 000 J 


© UCLES 2016 0625/11/M/J/16 

10 A coal-fired power station generates electricity. Coal is burnt and the energy released is used to boil water. The steam from the water makes the generator move and this produces electricity. 

 Which words are used to describe the energy stored in the coal and the energy of the moving generator? 

 coal generator 

 A chemical hydroelectric 

 B chemical kinetic 

 C geothermal hydroelectric 

 D geothermal kinetic 

11 Four different children run up the same set of stairs. 

 For which child is the useful power to climb the stairs the greatest? 

 mass of child / kg time taken / s 

 A 40 15 

 B 50 25 

 C 60 25 

 D 70 15 

12 The diagram shows three vases each with the same base area. Each vase contains water of the same depth. 

### P Q R 

 water water water 

 Which statement about the water pressures at points P, Q and R is correct? 

 A The pressure at point P is the greatest. 

 B The pressure at point Q is the least. 

 C The pressure at point R is the greatest. 

 D The pressures at points P, Q and R are the same. 


© UCLES 2016 0625/11/M/J/16 [Turn over 

13 The diagram shows a simple mercury barometer. 

 V 

### W 

### X 

### Y 

### Z 

 mercury 

 The atmospheric pressure increases. 

 Which distance increases? 

 A VW B WY C XY D XZ 

14 Which statement about evaporation is correct? 

 A Evaporation causes the temperature of the remaining liquid to decrease. 

 B Evaporation does not occur from a cold liquid near its freezing point. 

 C Evaporation does not occur from a dense liquid, such as mercury. 

 D Evaporation occurs from all parts of a liquid. 

15 A gas is stored in a sealed container of constant volume. The temperature of the gas increases. This causes the pressure of the gas to increase. 

 What happens to the gas molecules during this pressure increase? 

 A The average kinetic energy of the molecules increases. 

 B The average separation of the molecules decreases. 

 C The average separation of the molecules increases. 

 D The volume of each molecule increases. 


© UCLES 2016 0625/11/M/J/16 

16 A substance loses thermal energy (heat) to the surroundings at a steady rate. 

 The graph shows how the temperature of the substance changes with time. 

### 0 

### 0 

 time 

 temperature P 

### Q 

 What could the portion PQ of the graph represent? 

 A gas condensing 

 B gas cooling 

 C liquid cooling 

 D liquid solidifying 

17 A student wishes to check the upper and the lower fixed points on a Celsius scale thermometer. 

 –10 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 °C 

 She has four beakers P, Q, R and S. 

 Beaker P contains a mixture of ice and salt. 

 Beaker Q contains a mixture of ice and water. 

 Beaker R contains boiling salt solution. 

 Beaker S contains boiling water. 

 Which two beakers should she use to check the fixed points? 

 A P and R B P and S C Q and R D Q and S 


© UCLES 2016 0625/11/M/J/16 [Turn over 

18 The same quantity of thermal energy is supplied to two solid objects X and Y. The temperature increase of object X is greater than the temperature increase of object Y. 

 Which statement explains this? 

 A X has a lower melting point than Y. 

 B X has a lower density than Y. 

 C X has a lower thermal capacity than Y. 

 D X is a better thermal conductor than Y. 

19 A liquid is heated in a beaker. 

 heating 

 liquid 

 The density of the liquid changes as its temperature increases. This causes energy to be transferred throughout the liquid. 

 How does the density change and what is this energy transfer process? 

 density 

 energy transfer process 

 A decreases conduction 

 B decreases convection 

 C increases conduction 

 D increases convection 

20 A rod is made half of glass and half of copper. Four pins A, B, C and D are attached to the rod by wax. The rod is heated in the centre as shown. 

 The pins fall off when the wax melts. 

 Which pin falls off first? 

 heat 

 pin A 

 pin B 

 pin C 

 pin D 

 glass copper 


© UCLES 2016 0625/11/M/J/16 

21 Which row shows the natures of light waves, sound waves and X-rays? 

 light waves sound waves X-rays 

 A longitudinal longitudinal transverse 

 B longitudinal transverse longitudinal 

 C transverse longitudinal transverse 

 D transverse transverse longitudinal 

22 Radio waves are received at a house at the bottom of a hill. 

 hill 

 radio waves 

 house 

 The waves reach the house because the hill has caused them to be 

 A diffracted. 

 B radiated. 

 C reflected. 

 D refracted. 

23 The ray diagram shows the image of an object formed by a converging lens. 

 50 cm 40 cm 72 cm 

 object 

 image 

 converging lens 

 What is the focal length of the lens? 

 A 40 cm B 50 cm C 72 cm D 90 cm 


© UCLES 2016 0625/11/M/J/16 [Turn over 

24 The diagram shows the dispersion of white light by a prism. 

 white light 

### X 

### Y 

### Z 

 spectrum of colours 

 prism 

 Which row could be correct for the colours seen at X, at Y and at Z? 

 colour at X colour at Y colour at Z 

 A red violet yellow 

 B red yellow violet 

 C violet yellow red 

 D yellow red violet 

25 Why can ultrasound not be heard by humans? 

 A The amplitude is too great. 

 B The frequency is too great. 

 C The speed is too great. 

 D The wavelength is too great. 

26 A sound wave has a certain amplitude and a certain frequency. 

 A second sound wave is quieter and lower in pitch than the first sound wave. 

 The second wave has 

 A a larger amplitude and a greater frequency. 

 B a larger amplitude and a smaller frequency. 

 C a smaller amplitude and a greater frequency. 

 D a smaller amplitude and a smaller frequency. 

27 Which statement about a magnet is correct? 

 A A magnet attracts a gold rod. 

 B A magnet does not attract a plastic rod. 

 C A magnet never repels another magnet. 

 D A magnet sometimes repels an unmagnetised nickel rod. 


© UCLES 2016 0625/11/M/J/16 

28 A student wishes to make a permanent magnet. She has an iron rod and a steel rod. 

 Which rod should she use to make the permanent magnet, and is this rod a hard magnetic material or a soft magnetic material? 

 rod type of magnetic material 

 A iron hard 

 B iron soft 

 C steel hard 

 D steel soft 

29 The circuit shown includes two meters X and Y, connected correctly. 

### Y 

### X 

 Which row gives the unit of the quantity measured by X and the unit of the quantity measured by Y? 

 meter X meter Y 

 A ampere ampere 

 B ampere volt 

 C volt ampere 

 D volt volt 


© UCLES 2016 0625/11/M/J/16 [Turn over 

30 A polythene rod is rubbed with a cloth. 

 polythene rod 

 cloth 

 The rod and the cloth both become charged as electrons move between them. 

 The rod becomes negatively charged. 

 Which diagram shows how the rod becomes negatively charged, and the final charge on the cloth? 

 A 

### + 

### + 

### + 

### + 

### + 

### + + 

### + 

### – –– + 

### – 

### – – 

### – 

### – – 

### – – 

### – – 

### – – 

### – – 

### – – 

### – – 

 electron movement 

 electron movement 

 electron movement 

 electron movement 

### B 

### + 

### + 

### + 

### + 

### + 

### + + 

### + 

### – – + 

### – – 

### – 

### C 

### – 

### – 

### – 

### – 

### – 

### – – 

### – 

### – – – 

### – – 

### – 

### D 

### – 

### – 

### – 

### – 

### – 

### – – 

### – 

### – – – 

### – – 

### – 

31 What is the function of a relay? 

 A to allow a current in one circuit to operate a switch in another circuit 

 B to prevent an electric shock by earthing a metal case 

 C to protect a circuit by melting if the current becomes too large 

 D to transform a d.c. voltage to a different value 


© UCLES 2016 0625/11/M/J/16 

32 The circuit shown contains three ammeters X, Y and Z. 

### 10 Ω 

### 20 Ω 

### A 

### A 

### X A 

### Y 

### Z 

 Which ammeter has the largest reading? 

 A X 

 B Y 

 C Z 

 D They all have the same reading. 

33 The diagram shows part of a circuit used to switch street lamps on and off automatically. 

 + 

### – 

### LDR 

 In the evening it gets dark. 

 Which row shows the effect on the resistance of the light-dependent resistor (LDR) and on the potential difference (p.d.) across it? 

 resistance of LDR p.d. across LDR 

 A decreases decreases 

 B decreases increases 

 C increases decreases 

 D increases increases 


© UCLES 2016 0625/11/M/J/16 [Turn over 

34 A domestic circuit includes a 30 A fuse. This protects the wiring if there is too much current in the circuit. 

 In which wire is the 30 A fuse positioned, and what does it do when it operates? 

 position operation 

 A live wire disconnects the circuit 

 B live wire reduces the current to 30 A 

 C neutral wire disconnects the circuit 

 D neutral wire reduces the current to 30 A 

35 A strong electromagnet is used to attract pins. 

 core 

 pins 

 coil 

 current 

 What happens when the current in the coil is halved? 

 A No pins are attracted. 

 B Some pins are attracted, but not as many. 

 C The same number of pins is attracted. 

 D More pins are attracted. 


© UCLES 2016 0625/11/M/J/16 

36 The diagram shows a transformer. 

 primary coil 800 turns 

 secondary coil 40 turns 

 input voltage 

 output voltage 

 The input voltage is 240 V. 

 What is the output voltage? 

 A 6.0 V B 12 V C 20 V D 40 V 

37 How many neutrons are in a nucleus of the nuclide 3717 Cl? 

### A 17 B 20 C 37 D 54 

38 A certain element has several isotopes. 

 Which statement about these isotopes is correct? 

 A They must have different numbers of electrons orbiting their nuclei. 

 B They must have the same number of neutrons in their nuclei. 

 C They must have the same number of nucleons in their nuclei. 

 D They must have the same number of protons in their nuclei. 

39 A radioactive nucleus emits either an α-particle or a β-particle. 

 What are the products of these two types of radioactive emission? 

 product after α-emission product after β-emission 

 A a nucleus of a different element a nucleus of a different element 

 B a nucleus of a different element a nucleus of the same element 

 C a nucleus of the same element a nucleus of a different element 

 D a nucleus of the same element a nucleus of the same element 


© UCLES 2016 0625/11/M/J/16 

40 A reading is taken every 10 minutes of the number of emissions per second from a radioactive source. The table shows the readings. 

 time / min 

 number of emissions per second 

 0 800 

 10 560 

 20 400 

 30 280 

 40 200 

 50 140 

 60 100 

 What is the half-life of the source? 

 A 10 min B 20 min C 40 min D 60 min 


© UCLES 2016 0625/11/M/J/16 

### BLANK PAGE 


© UCLES 2016 0625/11/M/J/16 

### BLANK PAGE 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2016 0625/11/M/J/16 

### BLANK PAGE 


