® IGCSE is the registered trademark of Cambridge International Examinations. 

 This syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 6 printed pages. 

© UCLES 2016 [Turn over 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

PHYSICS 0625/51 

Paper 5 Practical Test May/June 2016 

MARK SCHEME 

Maximum Mark: 40 

 Published 

This mark scheme is published as an aid to teachers and candidates, to indicate the requirements of the examination. It shows the basis on which Examiners were instructed to award marks. It does not indicate the details of the discussions that took place at an Examiners’ meeting before marking began, which would have considered the acceptability of alternative answers. 

Mark schemes should be read in conjunction with the question paper and the Principal Examiner Report for Teachers. 

Cambridge will not enter into discussions about these mark schemes. 

Cambridge is publishing the mark schemes for the May/June 2016 series for most Cambridge IGCSE®, Cambridge International A and AS Level components and some Cambridge O Level components. 


 Page 2 Mark Scheme Syllabus Paper Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 0625 51 

 © Cambridge International Examinations 2016 

## NOTES ABOUT MARK SCHEME SYMBOLS AND OTHER MATTERS 

Brackets ( ) Brackets around words or units in the mark scheme are intended to indicate wording used to clarify the mark scheme, but the marks do not depend on seeing the words or units in brackets, e.g. 10 (J) means that the mark is scored for 10, regardless of the unit given. 

Underlining Underlining indicates that this must be seen in the answer offered, or something very similar. 

OR / or This indicates alternative answers or words, any one of which is satisfactory for scoring the marks. 

AND Both answers or words must be given for credit to be awarded. 

e.e.o.o. This means "each error or omission". 

o.w.t.t.e. This means “or words to that effect”. 

c.a.o. This means “correct answer only”. 

NOT This indicates that an incorrect answer is not to be disregarded, but cancels another otherwise correct alternative offered by the candidate, i.e. right plus wrong penalty applies. 

e.c.f. This means "error carried forward". If a candidate has made an earlier mistake and has carried an incorrect value forward to subsequent stages of working, marks indicated by e.c.f. may be awarded, provided the subsequent working is correct, bearing in mind the earlier mistake. This prevents a candidate from being penalised more than once for a particular mistake, but only applies to marks annotated e.c.f. 


Page 3 

Mark Scheme 

Syllabus 

Paper 

 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 

## 0625 

## 51 

 © Cambridge International Examinations 2016 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 1(a) 

 correct 

 x 

 values in table 40, 35, 30, 25, 20 

 y^ 

 values in table, between 5 

 cm and 50 

 cm, decreasing 

## A 

 and 

## B 

 values correct 

 1(b) 

 Graph: Axes correctly labelled with quantity and unit, right way round and starts at originAppropriate scalesAll plots correct to ½ small squareGood line judgement, thin, continuous line, with neat plots 

 1(c) 

 method clearly shown on graph 

 1(d) 

## Y 

 value correct to ½ small square and 

## W 

 correct 

 1(e) 

 Difficulty of achieving balance or other sensible suggestion 

 1(f) 

 m in kg 

## × 

 g = 

## W 

 within tolerance with correct m unit (g or kg) 

 Total 11 


Page 4 

Mark Scheme 

Syllabus 

Paper 

 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 

## 0625 

## 51 

 © Cambridge International Examinations 2016 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 2(a) 

 All 

## V 

 to at least 1 d.p. and < 4 

## V 

 All 

## I 

 to at least 2 d.p. and < 1 

## A 

## R 

 values calculated correctly Column headings m, V, A, 

## Ω 

 2(b) 

 Expect ‘No’. (ecf allowed)Reference to values and idea of difference between them being too large to be explained by experimental inaccuracy(ecf allowed) 

 2(c) 

 filament glows 

 /^ dims, or lamp hot to touch 

 increase 

 /^ decrease in temperature of filament changes resistance 

 2(d)(i) 

 Variable resistor (rheostat) OR potentiometer OR potential divider 

 2(d)(ii) 

 Correct symbol for variable resistorCorrect diagram, with variable resistor 

 /^ potentiometer in series with power supply 

 Total 11 


Page 5 

Mark Scheme 

Syllabus 

Paper 

 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 

## 0625 

## 51 

 © Cambridge International Examinations 2016 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 3(a)(i) 

 v^ 

## = 20.0 – 22.5 

 3(a)(ii) 

 f^1 

 correctly calculated using candidate’s 

 v 

 3(b)(i) 

 v^ 

 = 19.0 – 21.0 and less than value in (a) 

 3(b)(ii) 

 f^2 

 correct. Both values 14–16 

 cm 

 3(c) 

 Correct method for average 

 3(d) 

 f^ value 14–16 

 cm 

 Correct unit for focal length 

 3(e)(i) 

 y^ 

 value 29–31 

 cm 

 3(e)(ii) 

 (x 

## – 

 y 

 ) no greater than 2 

 cm 

 3(f) 

 Any two from:Use of darkened room 

 /^ brighter lamp 

 Mark position of centre of lens on holderPlace metre rule on bench (or clamp in position)Ensure object and (centre of) lens are same height from the benchObject and lens and screen perpendicular to benchMove screen slowly back and forth to obtain best image (owtte)Repeat with different 

 u 

 value 

 Total 11 


Page 6 

Mark Scheme 

Syllabus 

Paper 

 Cambridge IGCSE – May/June 2016 

## 0625 

## 51 

 © Cambridge International Examinations 2016 

 Answer 

 Marks 

## 4 

 Uses same container throughoutHot water in container (any) and takes temperatures at intervals or at start and after a fixed timeOR Hot water in container (any) and takes time for a fixed temperature fall.Repeats with different insulators (all three used)Any two from:Constant room temperatureSame starting temperatures 

 (clearly stated) 

 Same volumes of hot water 

 (clearly stated) 

 Same thickness 

 /^ amount of insulation 

 Use container 

 without insulation 

 Use of a lidInsulates bottom of containerUses the copper canTable or tables: Temperatures with unit ºC 

 OR time with unit s (or min) as appropriate to method and different insulators 

 shownUse of readings: graph of temperature against timeOR compare results and comment that longest time to cool = best insulator or smallest drop in temperature in fixed time= best insulator (or reverse arguments) 

 Total 7 


