 This syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 14 printed pages. 

© UCLES 2018 **[Turn over** 

 Cambridge Assessment International Education 

 Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

**PHYSICS 0625/41** 

Paper 4 Extended Theory **October/November 2018** 

MARK SCHEME 

Maximum Mark: 80 

 Published 

This mark scheme is published as an aid to teachers and candidates, to indicate the requirements of the 

examination. It shows the basis on which Examiners were instructed to award marks. It does not indicate the 

details of the discussions that took place at an Examiners’ meeting before marking began, which would have 

considered the acceptability of alternative answers. 

Mark schemes should be read in conjunction with the question paper and the Principal Examiner Report for 

Teachers. 

Cambridge International will not enter into discussions about these mark schemes. 

Cambridge International is publishing the mark schemes for the October/November 2018 series for most 

Cambridge IGCSE™, Cambridge International A and AS Level components and some Cambridge O Level 

components. 


## 0625/41 

Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

October/November 2018 

 © UCLES 2018 

 Page 2 of 14 

 Generic Marking Principles 

 These general marking principles must be applied by all examiners when marking candidate answers. They should be applied alongside thespecific content of the mark scheme or generic level descriptors for a question. Each question paper and mark scheme will also comply with thesemarking principles. GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 1:Marks must be awarded in line with: • 

 the specific content of the mark scheme or the generic level descriptors for the question 

## • 

 the specific skills defined in the mark scheme or in the generic level descriptors for the question 

## • 

 the standard of response required by a candidate as exemplified by the standardisation scripts. 

 GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 2:Marks awarded are always 

 whole marks 

 (not half marks, or other fractions). 

 GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 3:Marks must be awarded 

 positively 

## : 

## • 

 marks are awarded for correct/valid answers, as defined in the mark scheme. However, credit is given for valid answers which go beyond thescope of the syllabus and mark scheme, referring to your Team Leader as appropriate 

## • 

 marks are awarded when candidates clearly demonstrate what they know and can do 

## • 

 marks are not deducted for errors 

## • 

 marks are not deducted for omissions 

## • 

 answers should only be judged on the quality of spelling, punctuation and grammar when these features are specifically assessed by thequestion as indicated by the mark scheme. The meaning, however, should be unambiguous. 

 GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 4:Rules must be applied consistently e.g. in situations where candidates have not followed instructions or in the application of generic leveldescriptors. 


Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

October/November 2018 

 Page 3 of 14 

 GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 5:Marks should be awarded using the full range of marks defined in the mark scheme for the question (however; the use of the full mark range maybe limited according to the quality of the candidate responses seen).GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 6:Marks awarded are based solely on the requirements as defined in the mark scheme. Marks should not be awarded with grade thresholds orgrade descriptors in mind. 


## 0625/41 

Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

October/November 2018 

 © UCLES 2018 

 Page 4 of 14 

# NOTES ABOUT MARK SCHEME SYMBOLS & OTHER MATTERS 

 B 

 marks 

 are independent marks, which do not depend on other marks. For a B mark to be scored, the point to which it refers must be seen specificallyin the candidate’s answer. 

 M marks 

 are method marks upon which accuracy marks (A marks) later depend. For an M mark to be scored, the point to which it refers 

 must 

 be seen 

 in a candidate's answer. If a candidate fails to score a particular M mark, then none of the dependent A marks can be scored. 

 C marks 

 are compensatory marks in general applicable to numerical questions. These can be scored even if the point to which they refer are not writtendown by the candidate, 

 provided subsequent working gives evidence that they must have known it. 

 For example, if an equation carries a 

 C mark and the candidate does not write down the actual equation but does correct substitution or working which shows he knew the equation,then the C mark is scored. A C mark is not awarded if a candidate makes two points which contradict each other. Points which are wrong butirrelevant are ignored. 

 A marks 

 A marks are accuracy or answer marks which either depend on an M mark, or which are one of the ways which allow a C mark to be scored. Amarks are commonly awarded for final answers to numerical questions. If a final numerical answer, eligible for A marks, is correct, with thecorrect unit and an acceptable number of significant figures, all the marks for that question are normally awarded. 

 Brackets ( ) 

 Brackets around words or units in the mark scheme are intended to indicate wording used to clarify the mark scheme, but the marks do notdepend on seeing the words or units in brackets, e.g. 10 (J) means that the mark is scored for 10, regardless of the unit given. 

 Underlining 

 Underlining indicates that this must be seen in the answer offered, or something very similar. 

 OR / or 

 This indicates alternative answers, any one of which is satisfactory for scoring the marks. 

 e.e.o.o. 

 This means "each error or omission". 

 o.w.t.t.e. 

 This means “or words to that effect”. 

 Ignore 

 This indicates that something which is not correct or irrelevant is to be disregarded and does not cause a right plus wrong penalty. 

 Spelling 

 Be generous about spelling and use of English. 

 If an answer can be understood to mean what we want, give credit. However, do not allow 

 ambiguities, e.g. spelling which suggests confusion between reflection / refraction / diffraction or thermistor / transistor / transformer. 

 Not/NOT 

 This indicates that an incorrect answer is not to be disregarded, but cancels another otherwise correct alternative offered by the candidate, i.e.right plus wrong penalty applies. 


## 0625/41 

Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

October/November 2018 

 © UCLES 2018 

 Page 5 of 14 

 ecf 

 meaning "error carried forward" is mainly applicable to numerical questions, but may in particular circumstances be applied in non-numericalquestions. 

 This indicates that if a candidate has made an earlier mistake and has carried an incorrect value forward to subsequent stages of 

 working, marks indicated by ecf may be awarded, provided the subsequent working is correct, bearing in mind the earlier mistake. Thisprevents a candidate from being penalised more than once for a particular mistake, but 

 only 

 applies to marks annotated ecf. 

 Significant 

 Answers are normally acceptable to any number of significant figures 

 ≥ 

2. Any exceptions to this general rule will be specified in the mark 

 scheme. 

 Units 

 Deduct one mark for each incorrect or missing unit from an answer that would otherwise gain all the marks available for that answer: maximum 1 per question 

. No deduction is incurred if the unit is missing from the final answer but is shown correctly in the working. 

 Unless listed here or stated in the mark scheme for the question, do not accept derived units e.g. kg m 

 / 

 s 

 2 

 for N is NOT acceptable. 

 The following are acceptable alternatives: N m for J, J 

 / 

 s or N m 

 / 

 s for W, N 

 / 

 m 

 2 

 for Pa, N s and kg m 

 / 

 s are both acceptable for momentum 

 and impulse. Beware: J is NOT acceptable for moments.Condone wrong use of upper and lower case symbols e.g. pA for Pa.Annotate with U. For more than one unit error in a question, underline with a wavy line to indicate an error which has not been penalised. 

 Arithmetic errors 

 Deduct one mark if the 

 only 

 error in arriving at a final answer is clearly an arithmetic one. Regard a power-of-ten error as an arithmetic error. 

 Transcription 

 Deduct one mark if the only error in arriving at a final answer is because previously 

 errors 

 calculated data has clearly been misread but used correctly. 

 Fractions 

 Allow these only where specified in the mark scheme. 

 Crossed out work 

 Work which has been crossed out 

 and not replaced but can easily be read 

 , should be marked as if it had not been crossed out. 

 Use of 

 NR 

 Use this if the answer space for a question is completely blank or contains no readable words, figures or symbols. 


Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

October/November 2018 

 Page 6 of 14 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 1(a)(i)1 

## (4800 

## / 

## 120 =) 40 

 m 

## / 

 s 

## B1 

 1(a)(i)2 

## ( 

 v 

 =) gradient of any part of straight line 

## C1 

 Value between 50 and 60 

 m 

## / 

 s 

## A1 

 1(a)(ii) 

 At 

 t 

## = 20 

 s, acceleration > zero 

## / 

 acceleration is taking place 

## / 

 greater acceleration than at 100 

 s 

## B1 

 At 

 t 

## = 100 

 s, acceleration = zero 

## / 

## 0 

## B1 

 1(b)(i) 

## ( 

## F 

## =) 

 ma 

## OR 5.6 

## × 

## 10 

 5 

## × 

## 0.75 

## C1 

## 4.2 

## × 

## 10 

 5 

## N 

## A1 

 1(b)(ii) 

 Speed 

## / 

 velocity decreases (with time) OR slowing down 

 OR negative accelerationOR Rate of decrease of speed 

## / 

 velocity 

## B1 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 2(a) 

## P 

## × 

## 1.5 

## B1 

 2(b)(i) 

## ( 

## W 

## × 

## 1.0 OR 210 

## × 

## 1.0 =) 210 

## N 

 m 

## B1 

 2(b)(ii) 

## P 

## × 

## 1.5 = 210 OR 

## P 

## = 210 

## / 

## 1.5 

## C1 

## 140 

## N 

## A1 

 2(b)(iii) 

## P 

## + 

## Q 

## = 210 OR 140 + 

## Q 

## = 210 OR Q 

## × 

## 1.5 = 210 

## × 

## 0.5 OR Q = 210 

## × 

## 0.5 

## / 

## 1.5 OR P 

## × 

## 0.5 = Q 

## C1 

## Q = 70 

## N 

## A1 


Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

October/November 2018 

 Page 7 of 14 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 3(a) 

 Energy cannot be created or destroyedOR energy can only be transferred from one form to anotherOR total energy remains constant 

## B1 

 3(b)(i) 

 Chemical (energy) to kinetic (energy) AND 

## / 

 OR potential (energy) 

## B1 

 Any 

 one 

 of: 

 Kinetic (energy) to potential (energy) OR gravitational (energy)Potential (energy) OR gravitational (energy) to kinetic (energy)Kinetic (energy) to thermal (energy) OR heat (energy) 

## B1 

 3(b)(ii)1 

 (momentum = 

 ) mv 

## OR 4.0 

## × 

## 12 

## C1 

## 48 

 kg 

 m 

## / 

 s or N 

 s 

## A1 

 3(b)(ii)2 

 (average force =) momentum change 

## / 

 time OR 

 m(v – u) 

## / 

 t 

## OR 

 (mv – mu) 

## / 

 t 

## OR 

 F = ma 

## AND 

 a = (v – u) 

## / 

 t 

## OR 48 

## / 

## 0.60 

## C1 

## 80 

## N 

## A1 


Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

October/November 2018 

 Page 8 of 14 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 4(a) 

 mass = 0.25 

 (kg) OR 

# ρ 

 = m 

## / 

## V 

## C1 

 volume = ( 

 π 

## × 

## 0.03 

 2 

## × 

## 0.1 = 2.8 

## × 

## 10 

 –4 

 (m 

 3 

## )) 

## C1 

 density = (0.25 

## / 

## 2.8 

## × 

## 10 

 –4 

## ) = 890 

 kg 

## / 

 m 

 3 

## A1 

 OR mass = 250 

 (g) OR 

# ρ 

 = m 

## / 

## V 

 volume = ( 

 π 

## × 

## 3 

 2 

## × 

## 10 =) 280 

 cm 

 3 

 density = (250 

## / 

## 280 =) 0.89 

 g 

## / 

 cm 

 3 

# OR ρ 

## = F 

## / 

 A = h 

 ρ 

 g 

# ρ 

## = F 

## / 

 Ahg 

## OR 2.5 

## / 

 π 

## × 

## 0.03 

 2 

## × 

## 0.1 

## × 

## 10 

## = 890 

 kg 

## / 

 m 

 3 

 4(b)(i) 

 manometer 

## B1 

 4(b)(ii) 

## ( 

## P 

## =) 

 hdg 

## OR 0.02 

## × 

## 800 

## × 

## 10 

## C1 

## 160 

 Pa 

## A1 

 4(b)(iii) 

 Value of 

 h 

 stays the same 

## M1 

 Difference in height not dependent on cross-sectional area of tubeOR Pressure of a liquid column depends only on values of 

 h, d 

 and 

 g 

## A1 


Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

October/November 2018 

 Page 9 of 14 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 5(a)(i) 

 2 different metals labelled 

## B1 

 2 junctions between different metals 

## B1 

 Correctly connected meter 

## B1 

 5(a)(ii) 

 Any 

 two 

 of: 

 Suitable for high temp measurement OR has wide rangeHas low value of thermal capacity OR absorbs only a smallquantity of thermal energy 

## / 

 heat 

 Measures temperature at a point OR small sizeResponds quicklyCan be used for remote sensing 

## B2 

 5(b)(i) 

 More sensitive 

## B1 

 Thread moves further (for same expansion) 

## B1 

 5(b)(ii) 

 More sensitive 

## B1 

 Greater expansion 

## / 

 more liquid (from bulb) 

## B1 


Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

October/November 2018 

 Page 10 of 14 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 6(a) 

 Any 

 three 

 from: 

 Temperature (of liquid 

## / 

 water) 

 Surface area (of liquid 

## / 

 water) 

 Draught 

## / 

 wind 

## / 

 movement of air (over surface) 

 Temperature of surroundingsHumidity (of surrounding air) 

## B3 

 6(b) 

 Any two 

 from: 

 More energetic 

## / 

 faster molecules escape 

 Less energetic 

## / 

 slower molecules remain OR remaining 

 water is colderThermal energy 

## / 

 heat flows from body 

## / 

 skin to colder water 

 (and person feels colder)OR (for one mark each)(Evaporation requires) latent heat of vaporisationThermal energy 

## / 

 heat flows from body 

## / 

 skin 

## B2 


Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

October/November 2018 

 Page 11 of 14 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 7(a) 

 Light of a single colour 

## / 

 wavelength 

## / 

 frequency 

## B1 

 7(b)(i) 

 Reflected wavefronts: In air, at least 3 wavefronts parallel to each other. 

## B1 

 Same spacing as incident wavefronts 

## B1 

 Reflecting at same angle with surface as incident wavefronts 

## B1 

 7(b)(ii) 

 Refracted wavefronts: In glass, at least 3 wavefronts parallel to each other AND continuous with incident wavefronts, unless drawn to right ofincident wavefronts. 

## B1 

 Smaller wavelength than incident wavefronts AND equally spaced. 

## B1 

 At smaller angle with surface than incident wavefronts and rotated clockwise compared to incident wavefronts 

## B1 

 7(c) 

 Rope drawn with 

 two 

 of: 

 Amplitude labelledWavelength labelledCrest and trough labelled 

## B2 


Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

October/November 2018 

 Page 12 of 14 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 8(a) 

 Particles 

## / 

 molecules 

## / 

 water 

## / 

 medium vibrate 

## B1 

 Vibration is in the direction travel of the wave 

## B1 

 Has compressions and rarefactions 

## B1 

 8(b)(i) 

 Value in range from 900 

 m 

## / 

 s to 2000 

 m 

## / 

 s 

## B1 

 8(b)(ii) 

 v 

## = 

 f 

# λ 

 in any form OR ( 

# λ 

## =) 

 v 

## / 

 f 

 OR answer to 

 (b)(i) 

## / 

## 800 

## C1 

 correct evaluation with unit 

 (m) 

## A1 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 9(a) 

 2 lamps with correct circuit symbol, in parallel, with correct connection to battery 

## B1 

 9(b)(i) 

## (12 

## / 

## 6.0 =) 2.0 

## A 

## B1 

 9(b)(ii) 

## ( 

## P 

## =) 

## I 

## V 

## OR 2.0 

## × 

## 12 

## C1 

## OR( 

## P 

## =) 

## I 

 2 

## R 

## OR 2.0 

 2 

## × 

## 6.0 

## (C1) 

## OR( 

## P 

## =) 

## V 

 2 

## / 

## R 

## OR 12 

 2 

## / 

## 6.0 

## (C1) 

## 24 

## W 

## A1 

 9(c) 

## ( 

## E 

## =) 

## I 

 Vt 

## OR 

 Pt 

 in any form OR 36 

## × 

## 20 

## C1 

## = 36 

## × 

## 20 

## × 

## 60 

## × 

## 60 

## C1 

## = 2.6 

## × 

## 10 

 6 

## J 

## A1 


Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

October/November 2018 

 Page 13 of 14 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 10(a) 

 (soft) iron 

## B1 

 10(b)(i) 

 Alternating 

## / 

 changing magnetic field in primary (coil) 

## B1 

 Alternating 

## / 

 changing (magnetic) field in core (and in secondary coil) OR (magnetic) field lines 

## / 

 flux link secondary 

## B1 

 e.m.f 

## / 

 voltage induced (in secondary coil) 

## B1 

 10(b)(ii) 

## V 

 P 

## / 

## V 

 S 

## = 

## N 

 P 

## / 

## N 

 S 

 in any form OR ( 

## V 

 P 

## =) 

## V 

 S 

## × 

## N 

 P 

## / 

## N 

 S 

## OR 78 

## × 

## 560 

## / 

## 910 

## C1 

## 48 

## V 

## A1 

 10(c) 

 Lower current 

## B1 

 (Power loss from cables 

## =) 

## I 

 2 

## R 

 so lower current means less power loss OR less heat loss 

## B1 


Cambridge IGCSE – Mark Scheme 

## PUBLISHED 

October/November 2018 

 Page 14 of 14 

 Question 

 Answer 

 Marks 

 11(a) 

## 14 

## 6 

 C on left-hand side 

## B1 

## 14 

## 7 

 on right-hand side (ignoring letter after or before 

## 14 

## 7 

## ) 

## B1 

 N after 

## 14 

## 7 

 on right-hand side 

## B1 

## + 

## 0 

## 1 

## − 

 e on right-hand side OR – 

## 0 

## 1 

## − 

 e on left-hand side 

## B1 

 11(b) 

 Not 

 α 

 because count-rate with paper increase 

## B1 

 Not 

 β 

 because count-rate with aluminium increase 

## B1 

 is 

 γ 

 because count rate reduces with lead only 

 OR does not reduce with paper or aluminium 

## B1 


