 The syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 16 printed pages. 

 IB18 11_0625_23/4RP © UCLES 2018 [Turn over 

# *9510057274* 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## PHYSICS 0625/23 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) October/November 2018 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. Take the weight of 1.0 kg to be 10 N (acceleration of free fall = 10 m / s 2 ). 


© UCLES 2018 0625/23/O/N/18 

**1** The diagram shows part of a micrometer screw gauge. 

## 0 

 mm 

## 1 2 

 45 40 

 35 

 30 

 What is the smallest reading that can be achieved using this micrometer screw gauge? 

 A 0.0001 mm B 0.01 mm C 0.1 mm D 1 mm 

**2** An object falls in a gravitational field with air resistance. 

 Which distance-time graph shows this motion? 

 distance fallen 

 time 

## A 

## 0 

## 0 

 distance fallen 

 time 

## B 

## 0 

## 0 

 distance fallen 

 time 

## C 

## 0 

## 0 

 distance fallen 

 time 

## D 

## 0 

## 0 

**3** A boy runs 400 m at an average speed of 4.0 m / s. 

 He runs the first 200 m in 40 s. 

 How long does he take to run the second 200 m? 

 A 60 s B 66.7 s C 80 s D 140 s 


© UCLES 2018 0625/23/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**4** A helium balloon is tied to a top-pan balance. A metal block of mass 100 g is placed on the balance. The reading on the balance is 91 g. 

(^91) g metal block helium balloon Which statement can be deduced from this experiment? **A** The balloon exerts a downward force of 0.09 N on the top-pan balance. **B** The helium has a mass of –9 g. **C** The helium has a mass of +9 g. **D** The resultant downward force on the top-pan balance is 0.91 N. **5** A student carries out experiments to find the mass and the volume of four samples of rock. The graph shows the results. 

## 200 

## 100 

## 0 

## 0 50 100 

 mass / g 

 volume / cm 3 

 sample P sample Q 

 sample R sample S 

 Which pair are samples of the same type of rock? 

 A P and Q B P and S C R and Q D Q and S 


© UCLES 2018 0625/23/O/N/18 

**6** An object accelerates from 10 m / s to 30 m / s in 4.0 seconds. 

 The accelerating force is 150 N. 

 What is the mass of the object? 

 A 0.033 kg B 5.0 kg C 7.5 kg D 30 kg 

**7** The diagram shows a uniform bar of length 120 cm and weight _W_. The bar is pivoted at a point 40 cm from the left end of the bar. 

 A load of 2 

_W_ (^) is suspended from the right-hand end of the bar. A downward force _F_ is applied to the left-hand end of the bar to keep it in equilibrium. pivot bar _F_ bar’s weight _W W_ 2 0 40 cm 60 cm 120 cm What is the magnitude of force _F_? **A** 2 _W_ (^) **B** _W_ **C** 2 3 _W_ (^) **D** 2 _W_ **8** An electron is moving at a speed of 5 × 10 6 m / s. A neutron is moving at a speed of 5 × 10 4 m / s. The mass of the electron is _m_. The mass of the neutron is 2000 _m_. Which row is correct? greater momentum greater kinetic energy **A** electron electron **B** electron neutron **C** neutron electron **D** neutron neutron 


© UCLES 2018 0625/23/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**9** Which device is designed to convert chemical energy into kinetic energy? 

 A an a.c. generator 

 B a battery-powered torch 

 C a car engine 

 D a wind-up mechanical clock 

**10** A barrel of mass 40 kg is raised to a height of 1.5 m by rolling it up a ramp. The length of the ramp is 8.0 m. The force _F_ applied to the barrel acts parallel to the ramp. The frictional force is negligible. 

 1.5 m 

 8.0 m 

 40 kg 

## F 

 Which row is correct? 

 gain in gravitational potential energy / J force^ F^ /^ N 

 A 60 7.5 

 B 60 40 

 C 600 75 

 D 600 400 

**11** What is the main process by which energy is produced in the Sun? 

 A combustion 

 B nuclear fission 

 C nuclear fusion 

 D radioactive decay 


© UCLES 2018 0625/23/O/N/18 

**12** A manometer is used to measure the pressure of a gas supply. 

 h 

 connection to gas supply 

 manometer 

 liquid 

 Which change gives a greater value of height h? 

 A using a less dense liquid 

 B using a more dense liquid 

 C using a narrower tube 

 D using a wider tube 

**13** A washbasin has an exit pipe covered with a plug of area 12 cm^2. A chain is attached to the centre of the plug to assist in pulling the plug away from the exit hole. The washbasin contains water to a depth of 0.080 m. 

 The density of the water is 1000 kg / m^3. 

 chain 

 plug 

 What is the force acting on the plug due to the water? 

 A 0.96 N B 800 N C 9600 N D 80 000 N 


© UCLES 2018 0625/23/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**14** Diagram 1 shows apparatus being used to observe smoke particles. 

 Diagram 2 shows how a smoke particle moves randomly. 

 microscope 

 air molecules and smoke particles 

 light 

 diagram 1 diagram 2 

 random movement 

 eye 

 Why do the smoke particles move randomly? 

 A They are hit by air molecules. 

 B They are less dense than air. 

 C They are moved by convection currents. 

 D They gain energy from the light. 

**15** A bubble of air has a volume of 2.0 cm^3 at the bottom of a lake where the total pressure is 4.0 × 10 5 Pa. The temperature of the water in the lake is constant. The atmospheric pressure at the surface is 1.0 × 10 5 Pa. 

 What is the volume of the bubble when it rises to the surface? 

 A 0.13 cm^3 B 0.17 cm^3 C 6.0 cm^3 D 8.0 cm^3 

**16** Which row shows the relative order of thermal expansion of solids, liquids and gases? 

 most expansion least expansion 

 A solids liquids gases 

 B solids gases liquids 

 C gases solids liquids 

 D gases liquids solids 


© UCLES 2018 0625/23/O/N/18 

**17** A block of ice is at a temperature of –100 °C. Energy is supplied at a constant rate. The graph shows how its temperature changes. 

 time 

## 200 

## 100 

## 0 

## –100 

 temperature / °C 

## 1 

## 2 

## 3 

## 4 

 At which points has the ice completely changed state to water and all the water completely changed state to steam? 

 completely changed to water 

 completely changed to steam 

 A 1 3 

 B 1 4 

 C 2 3 

 D 2 4 

**18** The temperature of the water at the bottom of a waterfall is greater than the temperature of the water at the top. 

 The gravitational potential energy of the water at the top is transferred to thermal energy at the bottom. 

 The specific heat capacity of water is 4200 J / (kg °C). 

 What is the temperature difference for a waterfall of height 21 m? 

 A 0.005 °C B 0.05 °C C 20 °C D 200 °C 

**19** One end of a shiny metal rod is heated and the other end quickly gets hot. 

 Which statement describes why the other end quickly gets hot? 

 A Metals are good thermal conductors. 

 B Metals are poor thermal conductors. 

 C Shiny surfaces are good emitters of infra-red radiation. 

 D Shiny surfaces are poor emitters of infra-red radiation. 


© UCLES 2018 0625/23/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**20** Four different surfaces are at the same high temperature. 

 Which surface will emit thermal radiation at the slowest rate? 

 colour of surface 

 texture of surface 

 surface area / cm^2 

 A black dull 10 

 B black dull 100 

 C white shiny 10 

 D white shiny 100 

**21** Plane water waves travel from a shallow region into a deeper region. They travel more quickly in the deeper water. 

 wave direction 

 shallow water 

 deep water 

 boundary 

 Which diagram shows the wave pattern in the deeper water? 

 A B C D 

**22** An object is placed 8.0 cm from a thin converging lens of focal length 5.0 cm. 

 5.0 cm 

 8.0 cm 

 converging lens F 

 object 

 Which statement about the image formed by the lens is correct? 

 A The image is real and inverted. 

 B The image is real and upright. 

 C The image is virtual and inverted. 

 D The image is virtual and upright. 


© UCLES 2018 0625/23/O/N/18 

**23** Light travels through air and then enters and travels through a parallel-sided glass block. 

 Which statement is correct? 

 A The angle of incidence is greater than the angle of refraction as the light leaves the block. 

 B The light emerging from the block is parallel to the light entering the block. 

 C The speed of the light decreases as it leaves the block. 

 D The wavelength of the light does not change as it enters the block. 

**24** Different parts of the electromagnetic spectrum are used for different purposes. Below are four statements about parts of the spectrum. 

 statement 1: Infra-red waves are used in television remote controllers. 

 statement 2: Radio waves are used to transmit television pictures from satellites to Earth. 

 statement 3: Ultraviolet waves are used for intruder alarms. 

 statement 4: X-rays are used for security checks. 

 Which statements are correct? 

 A 1 and 2 B 1 and 4 C 2 and 3 D 3 and 4 

**25** A sheet of ice floats on water. A source of sound S is positioned at the edge of the ice sheet. 

 Four microphones are placed equal distances from S. 

 Which microphone detects the sound from S first? 

## S 

## A 

## C 

## D 

## B 

 ice 

 air 

 water 


© UCLES 2018 0625/23/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**26** Which diagram shows the pattern and the direction of the magnetic field lines around a bar magnet? 

## N S 

## C 

## N S 

## D 

## N S 

## A 

## N S 

## B 

**27** A bar magnet is placed inside a current-carrying coil. The diagram shows four different experiments. 

 magnet slowly removed 

## 1 

 magnet slowly removed 

## 2 

 current in coil slowly reduced 

## 3 

## + – 

 current in coil slowly reduced 

## 4 

## + – 

 In which experiments is the magnet demagnetised? 

 A 1 and 2 B 1 and 3 C 2 and 4 D 3 and 4 


© UCLES 2018 0625/23/O/N/18 

**28** Which row shows the meaning of the quantity e.m.f. and the unit in which it is measured? 

 meaning unit 

 A electromagnetic force N 

 B electromagnetic force V 

 C electromotive force N 

 D electromotive force V 

**29** Which diagram shows the current-voltage ( _I_ _V_ ) characteristic for a filament lamp? 

## 0 

## 0 V 

## A 

## I 

## 0 

## 0 V 

## B 

## I 

## 0 

## 0 V 

## C 

## I 

## 0 

## 0 V 

## D 

## I 

**30** The diagram shows a light-dependent resistor (LDR) connected in a potential divider circuit. 

## V 

 The brightness of the light falling on the LDR is increased. 

 Which row shows what happens to the resistance of the LDR, and what happens to the reading on the voltmeter? 

 resistance of LDR reading on voltmeter 

 A decreases decreases 

 B decreases increases 

 C increases decreases 

 D increases increases 


© UCLES 2018 0625/23/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**31** The diagram shows part of an electric circuit. The reading on the voltmeter is 16 V. The current in the resistor is 8.0 A. 

## V 

## 8.0 A P^ Q 

 One coulomb of charge flows from P to Q through the resistor. 

 How much energy is transferred in the resistor? 

 A 2.0 J B 8.0 J C 16 J D 128 J 

**32** Which symbol represents an AND gate? 

 A B C D 

**33** Either a fuse or a circuit-breaker can be used to protect electrical cables from large currents that could cause overheating. 

 electrical supply 

## X 

Y (^) appliance cable cable live neutral When a fuse is used, where should it be connected, and when a circuit-breaker is used, where should it be connected? position of fuse position of circuit-breaker **A** X X **B** X Y **C** Y X **D** Y Y 


© UCLES 2018 0625/23/O/N/18 

**34** The circuit diagram shows an a.c. power supply connected to two diodes and a resistor. 

 a.c. power supply 

## X 

## Y 

 The graph shows the current from the supply. 

 current 

(^0) time 

## 0 

 Which graph shows the current in diode X? 

 current 

 time 

## A 

## 0 

## 0 

 current 

 time 

## B 

## 0 

## 0 

 current 

 time 

## C 

## 0 

## 0 

 current 

 time 

## D 

## 0 

## 0 

**35** A 100% efficient step-down transformer has primary voltage _V_ p and primary current _I_ p_._ 

 Which row compares the secondary voltage with V p and the secondary current with I p? 

 secondary voltage secondary current 

 A greater than V p greater than I p 

 B greater than V p less than I p 

 C less than V p greater than I p 

 D less than V p less than I p 


© UCLES 2018 0625/23/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**36** There is an electric current in a wire. The wire is placed in a magnetic field. A force acts on the wire due to the current. 

 Which statement is correct? 

 A The magnetic field must be produced by a permanent magnet and not by an electromagnet. 

 B The wire must be made from a magnetic material. 

 C When both the current and the magnetic field are reversed, the direction of the force is unchanged. 

 D When the current is reversed, but not the magnetic field, there will be no force on the wire. 

**37** Which diagram represents the structure of a neutral atom? 

## + 

+ (^) – 

## – 

## – 

 key neutron proton electron 

## A B 

## + + 

## – 

## + + 

## C 

## + 

## + + 

## D 

## – 

## – 

## – 

## – 

**38** A nucleus of 22888 Ra decays into an isotope of actinium, which then decays into a nucleus of 

(^22890) Th. What types of radiation have been emitted during this process? **A** one alpha particle only **B** one alpha particle and one beta particle **C** two alpha particles **D** two beta particles 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2018 0625/23/O/N/18 

**39** The diagram shows the paths of three different types of radiation X, Y and Z. 

## X 

## Y 

## Z 

 2 mm of plastic 

 10 mm of aluminium 

 50 mm of lead 

 Which row correctly identifies X, Y and Z? 

## X Y Z 

 A α-particles β-particles γ-rays 

 B β-particles α-particles γ-rays 

 C β-particles γ-rays α-particles 

 D γ-rays α-particles β-particles 

**40** The count rate due to a sample of a radioactive isotope is measured for 80 minutes. 

 time / minutes counts/second 

 countrate 

## 0 480 

## 20 380 

## 40 300 

## 60 240 

## 80 190 

 What is the half-life of the isotope? 

 A 20 minutes B 40 minutes C 60 minutes D 80 minutes 


