 This document consists of 11 printed pages. 

© UCLES 2020 **[Turn over** 

## Cambridge IGCSE™ 

**ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/22** 

Paper 22 **March 2020** 

MARK SCHEME 

Maximum Mark: 80 

 Published 

This mark scheme is published as an aid to teachers and candidates, to indicate the requirements of the examination. It shows the basis on which Examiners were instructed to award marks. It does not indicate the details of the discussions that took place at an Examiners’ meeting before marking began, which would have considered the acceptability of alternative answers. 

Mark schemes should be read in conjunction with the question paper and the Principal Examiner Report for Teachers. 

Cambridge International will not enter into discussions about these mark schemes. 

Cambridge International is publishing the mark schemes for the March 2020 series for most Cambridge IGCSE™, Cambridge International A and AS Level components and some Cambridge O Level components. 


###### PUBLISHED 

 Generic Marking Principles 

These general marking principles must be applied by all examiners when marking candidate answers. They should be applied alongside the specific content of the mark scheme or generic level descriptors for a question. Each question paper and mark scheme will also comply with these marking principles. 

###### GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 1: 

 Marks must be awarded in line with: 

- the specific content of the mark scheme or the generic level descriptors for the question 

- the specific skills defined in the mark scheme or in the generic level descriptors for the question 

- the standard of response required by a candidate as exemplified by the standardisation scripts. 

 GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 2: 

 Marks awarded are always whole marks (not half marks, or other fractions). 

 GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 3: 

 Marks must be awarded positively : 

- marks are awarded for correct/valid answers, as defined in the mark scheme. However, credit is given for     valid answers which go beyond the scope of the syllabus and mark scheme, referring to your Team     Leader as appropriate 

- marks are awarded when candidates clearly demonstrate what they know and can do 

- marks are not deducted for errors 

- marks are not deducted for omissions 

- answers should only be judged on the quality of spelling, punctuation and grammar when these features     are specifically assessed by the question as indicated by the mark scheme. The meaning, however,     should be unambiguous. 

 GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 4: 

 Rules must be applied consistently e.g. in situations where candidates have not followed instructions or in the application of generic level descriptors. 

 GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 5: 

 Marks should be awarded using the full range of marks defined in the mark scheme for the question (however; the use of the full mark range may be limited according to the quality of the candidate responses seen). 

 GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 6: 

 Marks awarded are based solely on the requirements as defined in the mark scheme. Marks should not be awarded with grade thresholds or grade descriptors in mind. 


###### PUBLISHED 

Maths-Specific Marking Principles 

1 Unless a particular method has been specified in the question, full marks may be awarded for any correct method. However, if a calculation is required then no marks will be awarded for a scale drawing. 

2 Unless specified in the question, answers may be given as fractions, decimals or in standard form. Ignore superfluous zeros, provided that the degree of accuracy is not affected. 

3 Allow alternative conventions for notation if used consistently throughout the paper, e.g. commas being used as decimal points. 

4 Unless otherwise indicated, marks once gained cannot subsequently be lost, e.g. wrong working following a correct form of answer is ignored (isw). 

5 Where a candidate has misread a number in the question and used that value consistently throughout, provided that number does not alter the difficulty or the method required, award all marks earned and deduct just 1 mark for the misread. 

6 Recovery within working is allowed, e.g. a notation error in the working where the following line of working makes the candidate’s intent clear. 


###### PUBLISHED 

###### MARK SCHEME NOTES 

The following notes are intended to aid interpretation of mark schemes in general, but individual mark schemes may include marks awarded for specific reasons outside the scope of these notes. 

**Types of mark** 

M Method marks, awarded for a valid method applied to the problem. 

A Accuracy mark, awarded for a correct answer or intermediate step correctly obtained. For accuracy marks to be given, the associated Method mark must be earned or implied. 

B Mark for a correct result or statement independent of Method marks. 

When a part of a question has two or more ‘method’ steps, the M marks are in principle independent unless the scheme specifically says otherwise; and similarly where there are several B marks allocated. The notation ‘ **dep** ’ is used to indicate that a particular M or B mark is dependent on an earlier mark in the scheme. 

**Abbreviations** 

awrt answers which round to cao correct answer only dep dependent FT follow through after error isw ignore subsequent working nfww not from wrong working oe or equivalent rot rounded or truncated SC Special Case soi seen or implied 

 Question Answer Marks Partial Marks 

 1 Expands right hand side and attempts to collect terms 

###### M1 

 Factorises or solves their 3-term quadratic M1 

 correct CVs 

##### 2 3 

##### , 

##### 5 2 

###### A1 

##### 2 3 

##### 5 2 

##### < x < mark final answer 

 A1 FT their CVs, provided both M marks awarded 


###### PUBLISHED 

**Question Answer Marks Partial Marks** 

 2 Valid method to find m 

 m = 

##### 9 7 1 

##### 10 6 2 

− (^)   

#####  =  

##### −   

###### M1 

 Valid method to find c 

 e.g. 

###### 1 

###### 7 6 

###### 2 

 = their × + c 

 M1 FT their m 

##### lg 1 3 4 

##### 2 

##### y = ^ their  x + their 

#####   

###### M1 

(^1 34) 

##### y = 10 2 x + oe, isw 

###### A1 

 3 Rewrites in quadratic form soi e.g. y = 3 x^ then y^2 − 3 y − 4 = 0 or (3 ) x^^2 − 3(3 ) x − 4 = 0 

###### M1 

 Factorises or solves their 3-term quadratic e.g. ( y + 1)( y – 4) [= 0] or (3 x^ + 1)(3 x^ – 4) [= 0] 

###### M1 

3 _x_^ = 4 **A1** (^) ignore 3 _x_^ = − 1 

##### x = log 4 3 or 

##### ln 4 

##### ln 3 

 oe, only 

###### A1 

(^4) _OC_^ ^ − _OA_ ^ = 4 ( (^) _OC_ ^ − _OB_ ^ )soi **B1** 

#### [ ] 15 

###### 3 

###### OC 

######   

= (^)    −   **B2** (^) **B1** for [ _x_ = ] 15 or [ _y_ = ] − 3 _OC_^ ^ = _their_ 15^2 + _their_ ( 3)−^2 **M1** 

###### 1 15 

###### 234 3 

######   

 (^) −    oe 

###### A1 

 FT their 

###### 15 

###### 3 

######   

 (^) −    and _their_ 234 5(a) Correct V shape with vertex on positive _x_ axis 

###### B1 

###### (0, 7) B1 

###### 7 

###### , 0 

###### 5 

######   

######   

######   

###### B1 


###### PUBLISHED 

**Question Answer Marks Partial Marks** 

 5(b) x = 2 B1 

 5 x − 7 = their ( 3)− oe, soi 

or (^25) _x_ − 35 = _their_ ( − 15)oe, soi 

###### M1 

 x = 

###### 4 

###### 5 

 oe 

###### A1 

 Alternative method 

 25 x^2 − 70 x + 40 = 0 oe (B1 

 factorising e.g. (^5 x − 4 )(^ x − 2 ) M1 

 x = 2, 

##### 4 

##### 5 

###### A1) 

##### 6(a) 2(6) + 6 θ = 2(6 + 5 π)oe M1 

###### 5 

 π 3 

##### θ = oe, soi 

###### A1 

 1 62 5 π 2 3 

 their 

######   

× × (^)     

###### M1 

 94.2 or 30π A1 

 Alternative method 

 arc AB = 10π (M1 

 sector is 

 10 π 5 12 π 6 

 = of the circle 

###### B1 

##### 5 

##### 36 π 

##### 6 

##### × 

###### M1 

 94.2 or 30π A1) 

6(b) (^) π 7 π 2 7sin 8 4   (^) +     oe, soi 

###### M2 

 M1 for 

 π 7 π 2 7sin 8 4 

  (^) + _their_       or π 7 π 2 7sin 8 4 _their_  (^)      +  ^  10.9 or 10.85 to 10.86 **A1** 


###### PUBLISHED 

**Question Answer Marks Partial Marks** 

 7 Eliminates one variable e.g. x^2^ = 5( x^2 − 2 x + 1) − 1 or y = 5 y − 1 − 2 5 y − 1 + 1 

###### M1 

 Collects terms ready to solve e.g. 4 x^2 − 10 x + 4 = 0 or 4 y^2 − 5 y + 1 = 0 

###### A1 

 Factorises, applies the formula or completes the square e.g. 2(2 x − 1)( x −2) or (4 y − 1)( y −1) 

###### M1 

Both (^) (0.5, 0.25) and (^) (2, 1) **A2 A1** for either (^) (0.5, 0.25) or (2, 1) provided nfww or _x_ = 0.5, 2 or _y_ =0.25, 1 8(a) Valid explanation e.g. Each value of _x_ is mapped to a unique value of _y_. 

###### B1 

8(b) (^) − 5  f  1 **B1** 8(c) (^) _a_ = 3, _b_ = 0.75 oe, _c_ = − 2 **B4 B1** for _a_ = 3 

##### B1 for c = − 2 

 M1 for 

##### 2 π 8 π 

##### b 3 

##### = oe 

##### A1 for b = 0.75oe 


###### PUBLISHED 

**Question Answer Marks Partial Marks** 

(^9) d(e^3 ) (^3) 3e d _x x x_ = soi^ 

###### B1 

 Applies product rule to e.g. numerator: their (3e^3 x )sin x + e^3 x^ cos x 

**M1** (^) or to _x_ −^2 sin _x_ : _x_ −^2 cos _x_ + −( 2 _x_ −^3 )sin _x_ or to e^3 _x_^ × _x_ −^2 : e^3 _x_^ × −( 2 _x_ −^3 ) + _their_ (3e^3 _x_ )× _x_ −^2 Correct quotient rule: (^2) ( ( 3 )) 4 _their_ 3e _x_^ sin _x_ e^3 _x_^ cos 2 ( e 3 _x_ sin ) _x x_ + _x_ − _x x_ 

###### M1 

 or applies product rule for a second time e.g. : 

(^2) ( 3 ) 3 3 3 3e sin c ) ( e ) ( 2 )( sin os e _x x x x their x x x x_ − − 

###### + + 

###### − 

 Fully correct derivative; isw A1 

 =0.5 

 δ d 

d (^) _x y their y h x_ 

######   

= (^)  ×   

###### M1 

 7.14 h or 7.137[66...] h with coefficient rot to 4 or more figs isw 

###### A1 

 Answer only, without working, scores SC1 

 10(a)(i) Correct method to find inverse M1 

##### g 1 ( ) 1 

##### 3 

##### x 

##### x 

− (^) = 

##### − 

 oe 

###### A1 

 10(a)(ii) g−^1 ⩾ 1 or [1, ∞) B1 

##### 10(a)(iii) 3 < x  4 or (3, 4] B2 B1 for 3 and 4 in an incorrect 

 inequality or for x > 3 or x ⩽ 4 


###### PUBLISHED 

**Question Answer Marks Partial Marks** 

 10(b) Correct graph for h B1 

 h−^1 the reflection of h in y = x B1 FT their h 

Both graphs drawn over the correct domain **B1** (^) **FT** _their_ h and h−^1 2 3 2 3 h h−^1 **B1** Correct graphs intersecting twice 

###### 11 

 2 

###### 1000 

 h 

##### π r 

 = or r^1000 π h 

 = soi 

###### B1 

_S_ = (^22) 

###### 1000 

 π 2 π π 

 r r r 

###### + ^  

######   

######   

 oe or 

###### S = (^ ) 

###### 1000 1000 

 π 2 π π π 

 h h h 

  (^) +   oe 

###### M1 

###### S = 2 

###### 1000 

 π r 2 r 

###### + ^  

######   

######   

 or better or 

# S = (^ ) 

 1 

(^1000 2) π 1000 2 π _h h_ 

###### + 

###### A1 

d (^2) π 2000 2 d 

###### S 

 r r r 

 = − − or 1 

d (^1000 2 1000) π 2 d 

###### S 

 h h h 

 −^ − = − + 

 B2 B1 FT for each term correct 

d (^) 0, 3 1000 d π 

###### S 

 r r 

 = = oe or 3 

d (^) 0, 2 1000 d π 

###### S 

 h h 

 = = oe 

###### M1 

 2 3 3 

###### 1000 2000 

 π 

π (^1000) π 

###### S 

######   

= (^)   +   or 1 2 3 3 

###### 1000 1000 

 2 1000π 1000 π π 

###### S 

######   

= + (^)     

###### M1 

 439 or 439.3 to 439.4 A1 


###### PUBLISHED 

**Question Answer Marks Partial Marks** 

 12(a) v = − 6 t + c soi B1 

 v = − 6 t + 18 M1 

 − 6 t + 18 = 0 , t = 3 A1 

 12(b) 6 2 18 2 

 t s t 

###### − 

 = + soi 

###### B1 

### ( −3(3) 2 + 18(3) ) − −( 3(2) 2 + 18(2)) M1^ FT^ their s^ provided it is from an 

 attempt to integrate 

 3 (metres) A1 Not from wrong working 

13(a)(i) (^) _a_ + _ar_ = 10 soi **B1** _ar_^2 = 9 soi **B1** Solves _their_ equations **M1** _r_ = 

###### 3 3 

###### , 

###### 5 2 

 − and a = 25, 4 

###### A2 

 A1 for either r = 

###### 3 3 

###### , 

###### 5 2 

 − or a =25, 4 

 or 

 for r = 

###### 3 

###### 5 

 − and a = 25 or 

 for r = 

###### 3 

###### 2 

 and a = 4 

13(a)(ii) (^125) 8 or 15.625 or 

###### 5 

###### 15 

###### 8 

 only 

###### B1 


###### PUBLISHED 

**Question Answer Marks Partial Marks** 

 13(b) d = 8 B1 

### [ ] 

#### { } 

#### { } 

 200 99 200 2( 10) 199( 8) 2 99 2( 10) 98( 8) oe 2 

###### S S 

 their 

 their 

###### − = 

###### − + − 

###### − + 

 M2 M1 for either sum correct or correct FT their d 

 119382 cao A1 

 Alternative method 1 

 d = 8 (B1 

_u_ 100 (^) = − 10 + 99 × 8 [ = 782 ]and _u_ 200 (^) = − 10 + 199 × 8 [ = 1582 ]and _n_ = 101 

###### M1 

###### 1 

###### (101)(782 1582) 

###### 2 

###### + 

###### M1 

 119382 cao A1) 

 Alternative method 2 

 d = 8 (B1 

_u_ 100 (^) = − 10 + 99 × 8 [ = 782 ]and _n_ = 101 

###### M1 

###### 1 

###### (101)(2 782 (101 1) 8) 

###### 2 

###### × + − × 

###### M1 

 119382 cao A1) 


