 DC (NF/CB) 196735/3 R © UCLES 2020 [Turn over 

 This document has 16 pages. Blank pages are indicated. 

* 6 5 6 2 3 4 6 4 7 4 * 

 ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICS 0606/12 

 Paper 1 February/March 2020 

 2 hours 

 You must answer on the question paper. 

 No additional materials are needed. 

 INSTRUCTIONS ● Answer all questions. ● Use a black or dark blue pen. You may use an HB pencil for any diagrams or graphs. ● Write your name, centre number and candidate number in the boxes at the top of the page. ● Write your answer to each question in the space provided. ● Do not use an erasable pen or correction fluid. ● Do not write on any bar codes. ● You should use a calculator where appropriate. ● You must show all necessary working clearly; no marks will be given for unsupported answers from a calculator. ● Give non-exact numerical answers correct to 3 significant figures, or 1 decimal place for angles in degrees, unless a different level of accuracy is specified in the question. 

 INFORMATION ● The total mark for this paper is 80. ● The number of marks for each question or part question is shown in brackets [ ]. 

# Cambridge IGCSE™ 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/12/F/M/20** 

 Mathematical Formulae 

**1. ALGEBRA** 

 Quadratic Equation 

 For the equation ax^2 + bx + c = 0, 

_x_ (^) _a b b ac_ 2 !^24 = 

- - 

 Binomial Theorem 

 ( a b ) a … … 

 n a b 

 n a b 

 n r 

 a b b 1 2 

 +^ n^ = n^ + J n^ -^1 + n^ -^2 2 + + n^ r^ r^ + + n L 

 KK 

 J 

 L 

 KK 

 J 

 L 

 KK 

 N 

 P 

 OO 

 N 

 P 

 OO 

 N 

 P 

 OO 

where _n_ is a positive integer and (^) ( !)!! _n r n_^ _r_^ _r_ = _n_ 

- 

 J 

 L 

 KK 

 N 

 P 

 OO 

 Arithmetic series u a n d 

 S n a l n a n d 

 1 

 2 

 1 2 

(^1 2 1) _n n_ − − = + = ^ + = + ^ h ^ h # h _Geometric series u ar S r a_ (^) _r r S_ (^) _r a_ (^) _r_ 1 1 1 1 1 _n n n n_ 1 1 −^! − − = = 3 = − ^ ^ ^ h h h 

**2. TRIGONOMETRY** 

 Identities sin 2 A + cos^2 A = 1 sec^2 A = 1 + tan^2 A cosec^2 A = 1 + cot^2 A 

 Formulae for ∆ ABC 

 sin A sin sin 

 a B 

 b C = = c 

 a^2 = b^2 + c^2 – 2 bc cos A 

 ∆ = 21 bc sin A 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/12/F/M/20 [Turn over** 

**1 (a)** On the axes below sketch the graph of _y_ =3 ( _x_ 2 ) ( _x_ 4 ) ( _x_ + 1 ), showing the coordinates of the points where the curve intersects the coordinate axes. [3] 

## O 

 y 

 x 

 (b) Hence find the values of x for which 3 ( x 2 ) ( x 4 ) ( x + 1 ) 20. [2] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/12/F/M/20** 

**2** Find the values of _k_ for which the line _y_ = _kx_ + 3 is a tangent to the curve _y_ = 2 _x_^2 + 4 _x_ + _k_ 1. [5] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/12/F/M/20 [Turn over** 

**3** The first 3 terms in the expansion of ( 3 _ax_ )^5 , in ascending powers of _x_ , can be written in the form _b_ 81 _x_ + _cx_^2. Find the value of each of _a_ , _b_ and _c_. [5] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/12/F/M/20** 

**4** The tangent to the curve _y_ ln 3 _x_ 4 _x_ 6 

 = ^2 j^ -^3 , at the point where x = 2 ,meets the y -axis at the 

 point P. Find the exact coordinates of P. [6] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/12/F/M/20 [Turn over** 

## 5 DO NOT USE A CALCULATOR IN THIS QUESTION. 

 In this question all lengths are in centimetres. 

## A 

_B_ (^) _D C_ 2 + 4 3 

## 5 3 

 The diagram shows the isosceles triangle ABC , where AB = AC and BC = 2 + 4 3. The height, AD, of the triangle is 5 3. 

 (a) Find the area of the triangle ABC , giving your answer in the form a + b 3 , where a and b are integers. [2] 

 (b) Find tan ABC , giving your answer in the form c + d 3 , where c and d are integers. [3] 

 (c) Find sec 2 ABC , giving your answer in the form e + f 3 , where e and f are integers. [2] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/12/F/M/20** 

**6 Solutions by accurate drawing will not be accepted.** 

 The points A and B have coordinates ( 2 4, )and ( ,6 10 ) respectively. 

 (a) Find the equation of the perpendicular bisector of the line AB , giving your answer in the form ax + by + c = 0 , where a , b and c are integers. [4] 

 The point C has coordinates ( , 5 p )and lies on the perpendicular bisector of AB. 

 (b) Find the value of p. [1] 

 It is given that the line AB bisects the line CD. 

 (c) Find the coordinates of D. [2] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/12/F/M/20 [Turn over** 

**7** p ( ) _x_ = _ax_^3 + 3 _x_^2 + _bx_ 12 has a factor of 2 _x_ + 1. When p ( ) _x_ is divided by _x_ 3 the remainder is 105. 

 (a) Find the value of a and of b. [5] 

 (b) Using your values of a and b , write p ( ) x as a product of 2 x + 1 and a quadratic factor. [2] 

 (c) Hence solve p ( ) x = 0. [2] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/12/F/M/20** 

**8** In this question all distances are in km. 

 A ship P sails from a point A , which has position vector 

## 0 

## 0 

 e o, with a speed of 52 kmh-^1 in the direction of 

 5 12 

## 

 e o. 

 (a) Find the velocity vector of the ship. [1] 

 (b) Write down the position vector of P at a time t hours after leaving A. [1] 

 At the same time that ship P sails from A , a ship Q sails from a point B , which has position vector 

## 12 

## 8 

e o (^) , with velocity vector 

## 25 

## 45 

## 

e o (^) kmh-^1. **(c)** Write down the position vector of _Q_ at a time _t_ hours after leaving _B_. [1] **(d)** Using your answers to **parts (b)** and **(c)** , find the displacement vector _PQ_ at time _t_ hours. [1] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/12/F/M/20 [Turn over** 

 (e) Hence show that PQ = 34 t^2 168 t + 208. [2] 

 (f) Find the value of t when P and Q are first 2 km apart. [2] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/12/F/M/20** 

**9 (a) (i)** Find how many different 4-digit numbers can be formed using the digits 2, 3, 5, 7, 8 and 9, if each digit may be used only once in any number. [1] 

 (ii) How many of the numbers found in part (i) are divisible by 5? [1] 

 (iii) How many of the numbers found in part (i) are odd and greater than 7000? [4] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/12/F/M/20 [Turn over** 

 (b) The number of combinations of n items taken 3 at a time is 92 n. Find the value of the constant n. [4] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/12/F/M/20** 

**10 (a)** Solve tan 45 ° 2 

` _a_ (^) + j (^) =-^1 for 0 ° G _a_ G 360 °. [3] **(b) (i)** Show that (^) sin _i_^1 1 (^) sin _i_^1^ + 1 = _a_ sec^2 _i_ , where _a_ is a constant to be found. [3] 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/12/F/M/20 [Turn over** 

**(ii)** Hence solve (^) sin 31 _z_ 1 (^) sin 31 _z_^ + 1 =8 for r 3 G _z_ Gr 3 radians. [5] **Question 11 is on the next page.** 


**©UCLES 2020 0606/12/F/M/20** 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. 

**11** Given that (^) _x x_ ln. _x_ 2 23 3 3 1 1 d _x_ 2 4 _a_ 1 +^ + (^) = 

## J 

## L 

## KK 

## N 

## P 

# y OO and that^ a^^2 1 , find the value of^ a.^ [7] 


