 This document has 16 pages. Blank pages are indicated. 

 IB20 03_0610_22/6RP 

© UCLES 2020 (^) **[Turn over** 

## *9085780919* 

# Cambridge IGCSE 

## ™ 

### BIOLOGY 0610/22 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) February/March 2020 45 minutes 

 You must answer on the multiple choice answer sheet. 

 You will need: Multiple choice answer sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 INSTRUCTIONS 

- There are **forty** questions on this paper. Answer **all** questions. 

- For each question there are four possible answers **A** , **B** , **C** and **D**. Choose the **one** you consider correct     and record your choice in soft pencil on the multiple choice answer sheet. 

- Follow the instructions on the multiple choice answer sheet. 

- Write in soft pencil. 

- Write your name, centre number and candidate number on the multiple choice answer sheet in the     spaces provided unless this has been done for you. 

- Do **not** use correction fluid. 

- Do **not** write on any bar codes. 

- You may use a calculator. 

 INFORMATION 

- The total mark for this paper is 40. 

- Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. 

- Any rough working should be done on this question paper. 


© UCLES 2020 0610/22/F/M/20 

**1** Which characteristic do **all** living organisms show? 

 A breathing 

 B excretion 

 C photosynthesis 

 D tropism 

**2** Using the binomial naming system, the Arctic fox is called _Vulpes lagopus_. 

 Which row is correct? 

 Vulpes lagopus 

 A genus kingdom 

 B genus species 

 C species genus 

 D species kingdom 

**3** What is a characteristic of both insects and arachnids? 

 A eight legs 

 B exoskeleton 

 C three pairs of legs 

 D wings 

**4** What structures can be found in both plant and animal cells? 

 A cell walls and cell membranes 

 B nuclei and cell walls 

 C cytoplasm and chloroplasts 

 D cell membranes and nuclei 


© UCLES 2020 0610/22/F/M/20 **[Turn over** 

**5** The actual thickness of the leaf shown in the diagram is 2000 μm, but its thickness in the diagram is 50 mm. 

 What is the magnification of the diagram? 

 A ×0.025 B × 25 C × 100 D × 100 000 

**6** What is the function of a root hair cell? 

 A absorption 

 B photosynthesis 

 C reproduction 

 D support 

**7** Which row describes osmosis? 

 movement of water 

 energy from respiration used 

 movement through a partially permeable membrane 

 A    key 

 B    = yes 

 C    = no 

 D    


© UCLES 2020 0610/22/F/M/20 

**8** A student made the following statements about the movement of ions by active transport. 

 1 It is the net movement of particles from a low concentration to a high concentration. 

 2 It is the net movement of particles from a high concentration to a low concentration. 

 3 It requires the use of energy from respiration. 

 4 It can only take place in living cells. 

 Which statements are correct? 

 A 1, 3 and 4 B 1 and 4 only C 2 and 4 only D 2 only 

**9** A test was performed on a food substance. A positive result was shown by a colour change to blue-black. 

 What solution was used for the test? 

 A biuret solution 

 B DCPIP solution 

 C iodine solution 

 D Benedict’s solution 

**10** The diagram shows an experiment on the digestion of the protein in egg albumen by protease. 

 The protease was taken from a human stomach. 

 In which test-tube will the protein be digested most quickly? 

 A B C D 

 egg albumen + protease 

 egg albumen + dilute hydrochloric acid 

 egg albumen + dilute hydrochloric acid + protease 

 egg albumen + dilute hydrochloric acid + boiled protease 

 water-bath at 37 °C 


© UCLES 2020 0610/22/F/M/20 **[Turn over** 

**11** The diagram represents enzyme action. 

### + 

### W 

### + 

### X Y 

 What are parts W, X and Y in this chemical reaction? 

 enzyme product substrate 

 A W X Y 

 B X W Y 

 C X Y W 

 D Y W X 

**12** A student drew a diagram to show the substances used and produced in photosynthesis in a leaf. 

 1 + 2 are used by the leaf 

 3 + 4 are produced by the leaf 

 Which row shows the correct labels for the diagram? 

### 1 2 3 4 

 A carbon dioxide glucose oxygen water 

 B water carbon dioxide glucose oxygen 

 C oxygen water carbon dioxide glucose 

 D glucose oxygen water carbon dioxide 


© UCLES 2020 0610/22/F/M/20 

**13** The diagram shows a type of plant cell. 

 cytoplasm 

 nucleus 

 vacuole 

 chloroplast 

 In which tissue is this cell found? 

 A leaf epidermis 

 B palisade mesophyll 

 C root epidermis 

 D xylem 

**14** The list shows some human health problems. 

 1 chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 

 2 constipation 

 3 coronary heart disease 

 4 obesity 

 Which problems can be caused by malnutrition? 

 A 1, 2 and 3 B 1 and 3 only C 2, 3 and 4 D 2 and 4 only 

**15** Cholera infection can cause the following events: 

 1 cells lining the small intestine secrete chloride ions 

 2 cholera bacteria produce a toxin 

 3 chloride ions move into the small intestine 

 4 water from the blood moves into the small intestine by osmosis 

 5 water potential of fluid in the small intestine becomes lower. 

 Which sequence of events will cause diarrhoea? 

 A 1 → 3 → 2 → 4 → 5 

 B 2 → 1 → 3 → 5 → 4 

 C 3 → 1 → 4 → 5 → 2 

 D 2 → 3 → 1 → 4 → 5 


© UCLES 2020 0610/22/F/M/20 **[Turn over** 

**16** Which food group is chemically digested in the mouth, passes through the stomach and continues to be broken down by chemical digestion in the small intestine? 

 A carbohydrates 

 B mineral salts 

 C proteins 

 D vitamins 

**17** When stems with white flowers are cut and placed in a blue stain the petals turn blue. 

 Which tissue in the stem does the stain travel through to reach the petals? 

 A epidermis 

 B mesophyll 

 C phloem 

 D xylem 

**18** Which process releases water vapour into the atmosphere from the leaves of trees? 

 A active transport 

 B osmosis 

 C respiration 

 D transpiration 

**19** Mammals have a double circulation. 

 Which shows the correct sequence for the movement of blood in a mammal? 

 A body → heart → lungs → heart 

 B body → lungs → body → heart 

 C heart → lungs → body → heart 

 D heart → body → lungs → heart 


© UCLES 2020 0610/22/F/M/20 

**20** The diagram shows a section through a blood vessel. 

### P 

### Q 

 Which type of blood vessel is shown, and in which direction does the blood flow? 

 type of vessel 

 direction of flow 

 A artery P to Q 

 B artery Q to P 

 C vein P to Q 

 D vein Q to P 

**21** The antibodies that give immunity to a disease can be acquired in the following different ways. 

 1 feeding on breast milk 

 2 infection by disease 

 3 vaccination 

 Which give active immunity? 

 A 1 and 2 only B 1 and 3 only C 2 and 3 only D 1, 2 and 3 

**22** During physical activity, what stimulates the brain to increase the breathing rate? 

 A decreased oxygen concentration in the blood 

 B decreased oxygen concentration in the lungs 

 C increased carbon dioxide concentration in the blood 

 D increased carbon dioxide concentration in the lungs 


© UCLES 2020 0610/22/F/M/20 **[Turn over** 

**23** The table shows some of the changes that occur during breathing. 

 from contracted to relaxed 

 from relaxed to contracted 

 diaphragm P X 

 external intercostal muscles Q Y 

 internal intercostal muscles R Z 

 Which changes occur to cause inspiration? 

 A P, Q and Z B X, Q and R C X, Y and R D X, Y and Z 

**24** How many molecules of ethanol are released from the anaerobic respiration of one molecule of glucose? 

 A 1 B 2 C 4 D 6 

**25** The diagram shows a kidney and its blood vessels. 

 artery vein 

 ureter 

 In a healthy person, which structure(s) transport glucose? 

 A artery only 

 B artery and ureter 

 C artery and vein 

 D ureter and vein 


© UCLES 2020 0610/22/F/M/20 

**26** The diagram shows a synapse. 

 Where are vesicles containing neurotransmitter molecules found? 

### A B C D 

 synaptic gap 

 direction of impulse 

**27** Which row shows the state of the ciliary muscles and suspensory ligaments, when the eye is focusing on a near object? 

 ciliary muscles 

 suspensory ligaments 

 A contracted slack 

 B contracted tense 

 C relaxed slack 

 D relaxed tense 

**28** The diagram shows a shoot growing towards light. 

 light 

 Which statement about the role of auxin in phototropism is correct? 

 A Auxin will move to the dark side of the shoot and cause cells to elongate. 

 B Auxin will move to the dark side of the shoot and prevent cells from elongating. 

 C Auxin will move to the light side of the shoot and cause cells to elongate. 

 D Auxin will move to the light side of the shoot and prevent cells from elongating. 


© UCLES 2020 0610/22/F/M/20 **[Turn over** 

**29** Bacteria such as MRSA are resistant to several different antibiotics. Some suggested actions for reducing the development of antibiotic resistance in bacteria are listed. 

 1 Only use antibiotics when necessary. 

 2 Only use antibiotics on resistant bacteria. 

 3 Do not use antibiotics to treat viral infections. 

 Which of the suggested actions are correct? 

 A 1, 2 and 3 B 1 and 2 only C 1 and 3 only D 2 and 3 only 

**30** The diagram shows a sperm cell. 

 Which part contains mitochondria to release energy for movement? 

### A C 

### B 

### D 

**31** What is a correct statement about lymphocytes? 

 A Lymphocytes engulf pathogens. 

 B Lymphocyte numbers can be reduced when a person is infected with HIV. 

 C Lymphocytes produce antigens. 

 D Lymphocytes transport oxygen to different parts of the body. 

**32** The statements describe how a protein is made. 

 1 mRNA passes through a ribosome. 

 2 mRNA molecules carry a copy of the gene to the cytoplasm. 

 3 The gene coding for the protein is copied in the nucleus. 

 4 Ribosomes assemble amino acids into proteins. 

 What is the order of statements that correctly describes how a protein is made? 

 A 2 → 1 → 3 → 4 

 B 2 → 3 → 4 → 1 

 C 3 → 1 → 2 → 4 

 D 3 → 2 → 1 → 4 


© UCLES 2020 0610/22/F/M/20 

**33** Which row shows the features of stem cells? 

type of cell (^) division involvedtype of cell **A** specialised meiosis **B** specialised mitosis **C** unspecialised meiosis **D** unspecialised mitosis **34** Which statement is a correct description of the role of meiosis? **A** to create genetically identical daughter cells **B** to halve the chromosome number in the daughter cells **C** to create diploid daughter cells **D** to maintain the chromosome number in the daughter cells **35** The photomicrograph shows some red blood cells. sickle-shaped red blood cell What are the possible genotype combinations of this person? **A** Hb SHb A^ or Hb SHb S **B** Hb SHb A^ or Hb AHb A **C** Hb AHb A^ only **D** Hb SHb S^ or Hb AHb A 


© UCLES 2020 0610/22/F/M/20 **[Turn over** 

**36** The events listed may happen in a population. 

 1 Better adapted organisms survive. 

 2 Mutation results in variation. 

 3 Survivors pass on their alleles to the next generation. 

 4 There is a struggle for survival. 

 Which sequence may lead to evolution in the population? 

 A 1 → 2 → 3 → 4 

 B 2 → 4 → 1 → 3 

 C 3 → 2 → 4 → 1 

 D 4 → 1 → 2 → 3 

**37** Which row describes how energy flows through a biological system? 

 type of energy 

 entering a biological system 

 transferred between organisms in a biological system 

 transferred from a biological system to the environment 

 A chemical heat light 

 B heat chemical heat 

 C light chemical heat 

 D light heat chemical 

**38** The diagram shows a food chain. 

 grass → mouse → owl 

 Which terms describe the position of the owl in this food chain? 

 consumer trophic level 

 A secondary second 

 B secondary third 

 C tertiary second 

 D tertiary third 


© UCLES 2020 0610/22/F/M/20 

**39** Which method is used to produce lactose-free milk? 

 A filtering milk to remove lactose 

 B heating milk to break down lactose 

 C using lactase to break down lactose 

 D using lipase to denature lactose 

**40** The diagram shows the positions of four farms and the concentrations of nitrate at different points in a river. 

 Which farm is likely to have been using too much fertiliser on its land? 

 farm A 

 farm B 

 farm D 

 farm C 

### 60 

### 40 

### 20 

### 0 

 nitrate concentration / ppm 

 direction of flow 

 direction of flow 


© UCLES 2020 0610/22/F/M/20 

### BLANK PAGE 


Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cambridgeinternational.org](http://www.cambridgeinternational.org) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which itself is a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2020 0610/22/F/M/20 

### BLANK PAGE 


