 This syllabus is approved for use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as a Cambridge International Level 1/Level 2 Certificate. 

 This document consists of 18 printed pages and 2 blank pages. 

 IB18 11_0610_21/3RP © UCLES 2018 [Turn over 

# *3938804197 

# * 

 Cambridge International Examinations Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education 

## BIOLOGY 0610/21 

 Paper 2 Multiple Choice (Extended) October/November 2018 45 minutes Additional Materials: Multiple Choice Answer Sheet Soft clean eraser Soft pencil (type B or HB is recommended) 

 READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS FIRST 

 Write in soft pencil. Do not use staples, paper clips, glue or correction fluid. Write your name, Centre number and candidate number on the Answer Sheet in the spaces provided unless this has been done for you. DO NOT WRITE IN ANY BARCODES. 

 There are forty questions on this paper. Answer all questions. For each question there are four possible answers A , B , C and D. Choose the one you consider correct and record your choice in soft pencil on the separate Answer Sheet. 

 Read the instructions on the Answer Sheet very carefully. 

 Each correct answer will score one mark. A mark will not be deducted for a wrong answer. Any rough working should be done in this booklet. Electronic calculators may be used. 


© UCLES 2018 0610/21/O/N/18 

**1** The sundew is a carnivorous plant that can trap small insects with sticky hairs and then digest them. When an insect gets stuck, other nearby sticky hairs bend over to trap the insect. 

 Which characteristics of living organisms are demonstrated when the sundew traps insects? 

 A growth and excretion 

 B growth and sensitivity 

 C movement and excretion 

 D movement and sensitivity 

**2** Systems of classification show which organisms share more recent ancestors. 

 What is the most accurate system of classification? 

 A using anatomy 

 B using DNA base sequences 

 C using morphology 

 D using a pedigree diagram 

**3** Which part of a plant cell controls the movement of substances into and out of the cell? 

 A cell membrane 

 B cell wall 

 C cytoplasm 

 D vacuole 


© UCLES 2018 0610/21/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**4** The diagram shows part of a leaf in cross-section. 

## X 

## Y 

 Structures X and Y are both part of the same 

 A cell. 

 B organ. 

 C tissue. 

 D vessel. 

**5** How do carbon dioxide and oxygen move into and out of a mesophyll cell? 

 A active transport 

 B diffusion 

 C respiration 

 D transpiration 


© UCLES 2018 0610/21/O/N/18 

**6** Four freshly cut potato cylinders were soaked for one hour in different salt solutions before being pinned to cork blocks. Two of the blocks are shown. 

 cork block 

 pin rigid potato cylinder 

 flaccid potato cylinder 

 Which solution would cause the potato cylinder to be most flaccid? 

 A 0.1 mol per dm^3 salt solution 

 B 0.3 mol per dm^3 salt solution 

 C 0.7 mol per dm^3 salt solution 

 D 1.0 mol per dm^3 salt solution 

**7** The data show the concentrations of sugar and starch in an onion. 

 total sugar including reducing sugar / g per 100g 

 starch / g per 100g 

## 3.7 0.0 

 The onion is tested with Benedict’s solution and iodine solution. 

 Which set of results is correct? 

 Benedict’s solution 

 iodine solution 

 A blue blue-black 

 B blue brown 

 C brick red blue-black 

 D brick red brown 

**8** Which statement about the structure of DNA is correct? 

 A Base A always pairs with base C. 

 B Base A always pairs with base T. 

 C It consists of proteins. 

 D It forms a single helix. 


© UCLES 2018 0610/21/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**9** The apparatus shown is used for an experiment on starch digestion. 

 Which test-tube contains the most sugar after 20 minutes? 

 A 

 starch solution and salivary amylase 

 starch solution and salivary amylase 

 starch solution 

 water-bath at 15 °C water-bath at 37 °C 

## B C D 

**10** A student wrote some notes about enzymes. 

 She wrote: 

 ‘The ......1...... of the enzyme is ......2...... to an area on the substrate. 

 This area on the substrate can fit into it to form an ......3...... complex’. 

 Which words correctly complete gaps 1, 2 and 3? 

## 1 2 3 

 A active site complementary enzyme-substrate 

 B active site similar enzyme-product 

 C shape complementary enzyme-product 

 D shape similar enzyme-substrate 


© UCLES 2018 0610/21/O/N/18 

**11** An experiment was carried out using the apparatus shown. 

 The carbon dioxide content of the water in each test-tube was measured at the start and again three hours later. 

 In which test-tube would there be a decrease in carbon dioxide content? 

 A B C D 

 black polythene to keep out light 

 water 

 water plant 

 water snail 

 light light light 

**12** The diagram shows a plant cell. 

 nucleus 

 cell membrane 

 chloroplast 

 cytoplasm 

 cell wall 

 vacuole 

 Which type of cell is shown? 

 A cuticle cell 

 B epidermal cell 

 C palisade mesophyll cell 

 D spongy mesophyll cell 

**13** What is the result of a diet lacking iron? 

 A bleeding gums 

 B poor wound healing 

 C reduced number of red blood cells 

 D weak bones and teeth 


© UCLES 2018 0610/21/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**14** The diagram shows part of the alimentary canal. 

 Which structure produces lipase? 

## D 

## C 

## B 

## A 

**15** The photomicrograph shows a cross-section through a buttercup root. 

## Z 

 What is the function of the tissue labelled Z? 

 A site of photosynthesis 

 B site of respiration 

 C transport of sugars 

 D transport of water 


© UCLES 2018 0610/21/O/N/18 

**16** Roots and leaves both act as a source and a sink for sucrose and amino acids at different times during the year. 

 At which point in the year are the roots most active as a source? 

## A 

 spring new leaves start to grow 

## B 

 summer leaves are mature 

## D 

 winter no leaves are present 

## C 

 autumn leaves die and fall 

**17** The diagram shows a circulatory system. 

 heart 

## 2 

## 1 

## 3 

## 4 

 capillaries of the lungs 

 capillaries of the rest of the body 

 Which vessels carry oxygenated blood? 

 A 1 and 2 B 1 and 4 C 2 and 3 D 2 and 4 

**18** What happens to the heart valves when the ventricles contract? 

 atrioventricular valves 

 semilunar valves 

 A valves close valves close 

 B valves close valves open 

 C valves open valves close 

 D valves open valves open 


© UCLES 2018 0610/21/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**19** The diagram with the structure labelled X shows a bacterium with proteins on its surface. The diagram labelled Y shows proteins made by the human body. 

## X 

## Y 

 Which row shows the correct combination for destroying the bacterium? 

 name of X name of Y 

 correct shape of Y 

 A antigen antibody 

 B antibody antigen 

 C antigen antibody 

 D antibody antigen 


© UCLES 2018 0610/21/O/N/18 

**20** The graph shows changes in the volume of air in the lungs of a person at rest, over a period of 30 seconds. 

## 0 

## 0 

## 1 

## 2 

## 30 

 time / s 

 volume of air in lungs / dm^3 

 Which graph shows changes in the volume of air in the lungs of the same person immediately after they have done five minutes of vigorous exercise? 

## 0 30 

 time / s 

## A 

## 0 30 

 time / s 

## B 

## 0 30 

 time / s 

## C 

## 0 30 

 time / s 

## D 

## 0 

## 1 

## 2 

 volume of air in lungs / dm^3 

## 0 

## 1 

## 2 

 volume of air in lungs / dm^3 

 0 

## 1 

## 2 

 volume of air in lungs / dm^3 

## 0 

## 1 

## 2 

 volume of air in lungs / dm^3 

**21** What is produced by anaerobic respiration in mammals? 

 A alcohol + carbon dioxide 

 B alcohol + oxygen 

 C lactic acid + carbon dioxide 

 D lactic acid 


© UCLES 2018 0610/21/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**22** Which row describes the functions of the bladder, kidneys and liver? 

 production of urea 

 excretion of urea 

 storage of urine 

 A liver bladder kidneys 

 B bladder kidneys liver 

 C liver kidneys bladder 

 D kidneys liver bladder 

**23** The diagram shows the structure of the eye. 

 Which structure refracts light? 

## A 

## B 

## C 

## D 


© UCLES 2018 0610/21/O/N/18 

**24** A student used two seedlings X and Y to investigate phototropism. 

 The diagram shows their investigation. 

## X 

 at the start of the experiment 

 piece of glass 

 light 

## X 

 after some time no curvature towards light 

 piece of glass 

 light 

## Y 

 at the start of the experiment 

 light 

## Y 

 after some time gives curvature towards light 

 piece of glass piece of glass 

 light 

 Which statement explains the difference in results between X and Y? 

 A The piece of glass destroyed the auxin on the shaded side of the seedling. 

 B The piece of glass destroyed the auxin on the side of the seedling facing the light. 

 C The piece of glass in X stopped the auxin travelling down the shaded side of the seedling. 

 D The piece of glass in X stopped the auxin travelling down the side of the seedling facing the light. 


© UCLES 2018 0610/21/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**25** The diagram shows part of the mechanism that controls blood sugar concentration. 

 liver 

 pancreas 

 3 more glycogen 4 less glycogen 

 5 more glucagon 6 less glucagon 

 1 more glucose 2 less glucose blood vessels 

 blood vessels 

 A person does one hour of exercise. 

 Starting with the pancreas, what is the sequence of events in which the hormone glucagon is involved? 

 A 5 → 3 → 2 B 5 → 4 → 1 C 6 → 3 → 1 D 6 → 4 → 2 

**26** The graph shows the number of cases of MRSA in one country between 2001 and 2006. 

 8000 

 7250 

 6500 

 5750 

 5000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 

 year 

 number of cases of MRSA 

 Between which years was the greatest change in the number of cases of MRSA seen? 

 A 2002 and 2003 

 B 2003 and 2004 

 C 2004 and 2005 

 D 2005 and 2006 


© UCLES 2018 0610/21/O/N/18 

**27** Which row describes sexual reproduction? 

 gamete nucleus 

 zygote nucleus 

 genetically different offspring produced 

 A diploid diploid  

 B diploid haploid  

 C haploid diploid  

 D haploid haploid  

**28** Which statement describes human male gametes? 

 A large, few and non-motile 

 B large, numerous and motile 

 C small, few and non-motile 

 D small, numerous and motile 

**29** Which organ secretes the most progesterone during pregnancy? 

 A adrenal gland 

 B ovary 

 C placenta 

 D uterus 

**30** What is the role of mRNA? 

 A assembles amino acids into protein molecules 

 B carries a copy of the gene out of the nucleus 

 C controls cell function by controlling the production of proteins 

 D duplicates chromosomes before mitosis 


© UCLES 2018 0610/21/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**31** The diagram shows the formation of new diploid cells. 

## X 

## Y 

 What do arrows X and Y represent? 

## X Y 

 A duplication of chromosomes meiosis 

 B duplication of chromosomes mitosis 

 C meiosis duplication of chromosomes 

 D mitosis duplication of chromosomes 

**32** A man marries a woman who has a different blood group from him. They have two children. The children have different blood groups from each other and different blood groups from their parents. 

 What are the genotypes of the parent’s blood groups? 

 A IAIA^ and IAIB^ B IAIA^ and IoIo^ C IAIB^ and IBIB^ D IAIB^ and IoIo 

**33** Sickle-cell anaemia is a genetic disease that is caused by the allele HbS. 

 HbA^ is the normal allele. 

 A woman does not have the symptoms of the disease but her brother does show symptoms. 

 If her mother and father do not have symptoms, which statement is correct? 

 A The woman has the genotype HbSHbS. 

 B The woman’s brother has the genotype HbAHbA. 

 C The woman’s father and mother both have the genotype HbAHbS. 

 D The woman’s father and mother both have the genotype HbSHbS. 


© UCLES 2018 0610/21/O/N/18 

**34** Over the last 30 years some antibiotics have become less effective in treating bacterial infection. 

 What is the reason for this? 

 A artificial selection 

 B asexual reproduction 

 C more effective new antibiotics 

 D natural selection 

**35** The diagram shows part of the nitrogen cycle. 

 nitrogen in atmosphere 

 plants 

## Y 

## Z 

## X 

## W 

 ammonium ions 

 nitrate ions 

 animals 

 Which row correctly identifies the bacteria involved in processes W, X, Y and Z? 

## W X Y Z 

 A denitrifying decomposer nitrifying nitrogen-fixing 

 B denitrifying nitrifying decomposer nitrogen-fixing 

 C nitrifying decomposer nitrogen-fixing denitrifying 

 D nitrogen-fixing nitrifying decomposer denitrifying 


© UCLES 2018 0610/21/O/N/18 **[Turn over** 

**36** The graph shows a bacteria population curve. 

 In which phase on the graph is the number of bacteria dying equal to the number dividing? 

## 0 

## 0 

 number of bacteria 

 time / min 

## A B C D 

**37** Bacteria are used in genetic engineering and biotechnology. 

 Bacteria are used because of the presence of which cell structure? 

 A cell membrane 

 B cell wall 

 C cytoplasm 

 D plasmids 

**38** What is an example of genetic engineering? 

 A using enzymes to make washing powders 

 B using pectinase to make fruit juice 

 C producing plants that have been given genes for resistance to insect pests 

 D using yeast to make bread 

**39** What is **least** likely to result from deforestation? 

 A increase in flooding 

 B increase in species 

 C loss of habitats 

 D loss of soil 


© UCLES 2018 0610/21/O/N/18 

**40** Pieces of plastic between 1 μm and 1 mm in size are called microplastics. Microplastics are put into some face creams and are produced during clothing manufacture. They can now be found in increasing quantities in oceans all over the world. 

 As well as their small size, which other property of microplastics make them dangerous to living organisms? 

 A They are lightweight. 

 B They are non-biodegradable. 

 C They are non-reactive. 

 D They are toxic. 


## BLANK PAGE 

© UCLES 2018 0610/21/O/N/18 


## BLANK PAGE 

Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity. 

To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge International Examinations Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at [http://www.cie.org.uk](http://www.cie.org.uk) after the live examination series. 

Cambridge International Examinations is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is itself a department of the University of Cambridge. 

© UCLES 2018 0610/21/O/N/18 


